committee's time, and we really-- and the way that
you have engaged with the feedback through the process to get us to today.
This is a great space for us to consider extending mandatory lifejacket
wear to people of all ages, and for exploring how that requirement might
apply when a vessel is underway. We think it's a very positive direction, and it
reflects the strength and the evidence that you've been hearing.
As we said when we last appeared, this is a once in a generation opportunity
to make a meaningful, lasting reduction in drowning deaths in
Aotearoa. A huge difference to those whanau
whose family members who currently don't come home.
However, we are here again because like our partners in the sector, we believe this
is the moment to go further,
not incrementally,
but decisively, to ensure that the final law is clear, practical, and
effective as it can be.
As I've mentioned at the start, we are conscious of your time, but I'll hand over
to Glenn just to expand on why this is such a critical moment, and
why getting it right and getting the settings right will make a huge difference.
Glenn, over to you.
Kia ora koutou. Thanks, Anna.
Look, we continue to advocate for that one simple, clear rule for all
recreational craft because the data shows people just
don't die on small boats.
A very simple analogy,
we don't have different seat-- have different seat-
Sorry, Glenn, you've broken up there
... different seat-
You've frozen
... regulations for different vehicles, except for buses.
So Glenn, you're frozen.
I think, Anna, you might need to take over.
That's good.
Sorry, that might be unfair on you.
Maybe we will-- Glenn, are you--
Can you unfreeze?
Maybe turn your video off.
I can dial in if you want. Put him on speaker.
Sorry.
Yeah. Think hang on. Yeah, okay. Look, I think, Anna, what
we might do-
Yep
... what we might do is see if we can do technology a different way.
We'll come back to you in a moment. We've got another submitter.
Yep.
I'll pause your time and start again from-
Thank you
... from seven and a half minutes or eight minutes I'll make it, to
come back again. So we'll have another go, getting him in. Okay?
Cool. Right. Who else have we got?
We've got Recreation Aotearoa.
Okay.
Right.
Sam.
Testing audio, testing video.
Yeah. Look, all good there. We will-- Sorry, we've just had to
jump to you because the previous submitter, the technology
froze on us.
Yeah.
But anyway, so we'll start you. We've got your submission.
Take that as read, please. Thank you very much for making a further submission.
And look forward to what you've got to say. I'll give you a call with four to go.
And time starts now.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Chairperson and members of the committee.
I'm Sam Newton, advocacy manager for Recreation Aotearoa.
Recreation Aotearoa is the professional association and industry body responsible
for providing leadership, advocacy, guidance, quality assurance,
technical advice, and professional development opportunities for those
involved in the broader recreation sector.
We are the collective voice of recreation, ensuring that the value of recreation is
recognized across government, industry, and communities.
Our membership is broad, over 5,000 members.
A lot of policymakers,
people who work for councils, territorial local authorities,
voluntary organizations, NGOs, regional sports trusts, a
lot of outdoor recreation providers,
and many others engaged in delivering facilities, recreation infrastructure,
programs, and services that make recreation accessible for New Zealanders.
Relevant to this bill,
many of our members work in aquatic facilities, either privately owned
or council owned. So they're at the frontline of aquatic education.
And many outdoor education providers who
take young people and adults, generally on a nonprofit basis,
out into the great outdoors and in many cases, on the water.
We thank you and your committee for the opportunity to speak again.
We want to begin by commending your decision to consider an out of
scope amendment to extend the
mandate of lifejackets to all occupants.
We regard this as a bold, evidence-based move.
And we-- it recognizes the reality of water safety in New Zealand that
perhaps the initial member's bill didn't quite
land. And as someone who's worked in Parliament and has appeared before many select
committees, I just want to commend the committee and say that feels
like democracy and Parliament working really well, that you went that
extra half mile to
make this work in a better way. So really appreciate that.
You would have heard these statistics before in the first round, and you'll hear
them again.
Seventeen boating fatalities per year.
Average age of these victims is not a child.
It's very much middle-aged white males like me.
While the original bill focused on children under 15, we know they're
not the primary risk group. We heard a lot of heart-wrenching evidence as
I listened into those select committee hearings in the first rounds.
We know that in a tough situation, adults on board of a
boat are unable to access or don their
jackets once they're on the water, and they've
tragically drowned in those highly stressful, highly
complexOn occasions. By extending this
requirement to all ages, you're addressing the core of the problem
and, as the previous submitter began to mention, creating the
biggest drowning prevention opportunity in a generation.
We strongly support the proposal to mandate wearing whenever a vessel is
underway.
Most incidents happen while boats are moving, leaving no time to grab a life jacket
that is just merely stowed or carried on board.
To ensure that this rule is practical and enforceable, we recommend a very clear
definition of what underway is, and it needs to
include the idea that you're moving through water and excluding
times when a vessel is stationary, such as when it's moored to a
buoy, anchored, or when occupants are
sleeping or resting, for example.
While we celebrate the move toward protecting all ages, we have a
couple of concerns regarding the proposed six-meter waterline length
threshold.
This limit remains a barrier to achieving a truly
effective safety culture for a couple of reasons.
Firstly, vehicle length is not a proxy for risk.
While smaller craft capsize more easily, fatalities are frequent on
larger vessels. I'm sure you've been provided statistics from the
Safer Boating Forum and the Coastguard
that 93 people drowned on recreational vessels over
66 meters in the last 25
years. And at least 20, 33% of recorded
influence incidents involved vessels eight meters or longer.
Drowning doesn't stop at an arbitrary six-meter line.
Acknowledge there needs to be a line somewhere, but perhaps six meters is not it.
Secondly, waterline length is quite a confusing metric.
I'm a boat owner myself. I know that mine is
a Kiwi craft and I know it's 15 feet long,
but I'm sure that's not the waterline length.
I'm a fairly typical average recreational
boater. I don't know
the waterline length of mine. Inevitably different
from the advertised model size, which was 15 feet.
So it's sort of a unnecessary complexity to a rule that needs to be
simple to be followed.
So, in summary, we need one clear simple national rule
and the amendment, sorry, the members bill, the original members bill was a
really good effort at getting after that. I really appreciate that.
Your out of scope amendments is even
better getting after that. But the rule needs to be, if the
boat is underway, the lifejacket is on.
We don't ask drivers to decide which passengers are at risk enough to wear a
seatbelt in a car, and we shouldn't expect skippers of a
recreational boat to navigate a complex
patchwork of regional bylaws and length-based thresholds
understanding the waterline length of their boat.
We have a history of doing well on this stuff.
Clear legislation works. The pool fencing laws in the late '80s,
early '90s, I think they were, were a really good example of that.
Very clear, very simple, widely adopted, widely understood, and
widely accepted, and they reduced drownings
materially.
To summarize, we,
Recreation Aotearoa urges the committee to proceed with the amendment to include
all occupants as this is the most single effective way to save the
estimated 12 lives lost per year that the Safer Boating Forum and the
Coastguard will provide those stats.
Secondly, adopt the underway requirement with a plain language
definition.
And thirdly, to think about removing the six-meter threshold to ensure
the rule applies to all recreational craft, providing the clarity and
consistency New Zealanders deserve.
We'd like to see wearing a lifejacket as being as normal as wearing a seatbelt.
One minute, Sam.
Happy to take any questions. I'm sure you've received the
data from numerous submitters and, I guess, to
acknowledge that we've drawn upon
perspectives of not only our own members who work in this
realm,
but our friends and colleagues and stakeholders in the Safer Boating
Forum, Auckland Drowning Prevention, Coastguard, Water
Safety. It's been a really great team
effort.
Yeah. No, look, thanks, Sam. Simon, question.
Thanks. Hi, Sam. Simon Thort here.
Look, I was at the Auckland Boat Show on the weekend.
I think it'd be fair to say that amongst the tens of millions of dollars'
worth of beautiful boats that were for sale,
and all of the people kicking the tires on trailers and boats
and outboards and all the gear,
when I asked people, "Would you need to wear a lifejacket
on this vessel if it was underway?"
the manufacturers, the suppliers
said, "Look, it's pretty safe. Unless it was really
rough, why would you?" That's the prevailing
view that I pick up from recreational boaties.
So a law change is one thing.
How do you effect a culture change without risking a
massive backlash?
I'm surprised by that observation.
I
recreationally use a boat.
I don't see a lot of people not using lifejackets when the
boat's underway.
Lifejackets are unobtrusive now.
I'm sure you saw at the boat show, unobtrusive,
inflatable lifejackets, fairly low cost.
There's numerous efforts to get that out and about.
I think Coastguard and Water Safety, Maritime New Zealand do a great job, and
the harbor masters in every place and space will
benefit from-Consistency.
Perhaps people have grown up and developed their boating
skills in different places where the bylaws have been different.
But universalisation, consistency will,
I think, address at least some of those observations you made.
Yeah. Look, I am concerned because you've
suggested that
you think everyone wears a life jacket, whereas I've
observed something different on the water in Auckland,
where we don't have the same rules, say, as the Bay of Plenty.
And I'm interested in how you think we could
effect a culture change to go along with the law change.
Or do you think it's already done?
I think there's numerous examples in New Zealand in the realm of
drink driving, ACC,
smoking prevention, where governments have made
subtle and not so subtle interventions around
publicity and education efforts.
I think the Coast Guard, Maritime New Zealand, and Water Safety are more than
capable of making those efforts,
if they are given the resourcing required.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay, thanks. Other questions?
Yes.
Celia.
Please. And
thank you for coming in, Sam,
online. I wondered what you thought about, I think
it was Fish and Game, but it might have been a different submission, that talked
about when boats are drifting,
not needing life jackets.
Yeah.
Where do we draw the line between underway and at
anchor, and where would you put the drifting side of things?
Actually, Sam, if I can just add to that.
They actually specifically talk about the very slow speed trolling at about two
kilometers.
Yeah, I think it
must be less than five knots.
Yeah, that sort of capacity.
I mean, sort of walking speed. Yeah.
Look, I'm not an expert in that. Our members are not
representative of that community and have no particular
input on that.
Much like waterline length or length of vessel, a line's got to be drawn
somewhere. I think there is law inside the maritime legislation
around very small dive boats
allowing for wetsuits instead of life jackets.
So I'd interrogate that
section of legislation. There might be something in there to draw inspiration upon.
Thank you. Yeah, even my kayak goes faster than 2K.
Yeah.
As does my 2K row.
Mine's doing similar.
But, I
appreciate the question. I've worked in parliament.
I know law is tricky. There's always stuff at the margins.
There's always little things that need to be tidied up.
But the general thrust of this is excellent, and the
fact that you've gone for that out of scope amendment to
go for a broader range of ages, to
universalize it across all age groups is a good start, so.
Sam, I'm going to need to cut you-- I'm sorry.
Great exposition, but I'm going to have to cut you off just time-wise to let
people come on. But really appreciate it.
Thank you, sir.
Well done.
Thank you very much.
Okay, have we got Water Safety back?
Yep.
Okay, let's-
So Glen's going to lead his camera.
Okay. Right.
Glen
and Anna, are you back?
Yeah, they
just
came on.
Oh. Right. Welcome back, Anna.
Welcome.
Right. Okay. I think, Glen, you're going to speak to us rather than
leave your camera on. We'll see how we go.
I'll leave my camera off again, just like I did last time.
Okay, right.
Now that you know what I look like.
So look, I'll pick up where I left off.
We continue to advocate for one simple, clear rule for all recreational
craft users, because the data shows, as the previous
speakers said, people just don't die on small boats.
A simple analogy and one you'll be getting used to is we don't have
different seatbelt rules for different sized cars.
Indeed, more children have died on larger vessels.
This is about saving lives. Unashamedly, we
want the best result for that and creating behavior
change, which Simon was just asking about.
Look, in our October submission, we did refer to Tasmania and Victoria.
I had a chat to our Tasmanian friends yesterday, and they've
had their rules in place now for 20 plus
years.
They say putting on a life jacket is now treated as second
nature. It is as akin to wearing a seatbelt,
and they've seen an 80% reduction in deaths per craft
numbers since bringing that rule in, which is a fantastic result.
Our modeling shows a clear rule for all recreational users will save 12
lives every year if they wear a life jacket.
And this year,
just to finish so we can get to questions pretty quickly, seven of our
41 drownings so far, and we are having a tough year so
far, have been from craft.
Six, from memory, of those seven were not wearing a life jacket.
So a clear rule for all recreational users, a practical
one, could be saving lives as soon as we can get it into
practice.
And finally, I do want to thank the committee and commend it
for the amendment that has already been made. It's a great step.
So we're open to take some questions.
Okay. Shane.
Thank you, Glen. Shane Reti speaking.
I'd like to just pose a question that my colleague asked a previous submitter,
because I think it's a useful one, about vessels underway, and
the proposition from another submitter was that for
inland lakes,
those that are underway exclude less than two
knots, those who are drifting or electronically stationary.
Do you have any view on that?
Oh, look, we could probably take a look at some data.
We have it, but I suppose the risk is you start creating carve-outs for
different environments,
which actually makes the rules harder to understand and implement.
Yeah.
And our view is that keeping the rules simple is the best approach.
As soon as you start splitting it up to oceans,
lakes, rivers, et cetera, all of our water environments, it becomes much more
difficult for people to understand and follow.
Yeah. Thank you. And life jackets versus personal flotation devices, any issues
with the bill's recommendation to change the semantics
on that?
Oh, look,
the big thing for us, to be honest, is that
the law says that safety equipment needs to be used.
We're very happy to talk to the officials about the technicalities of the
bill
as it progresses and the terminology.
I suppose, as a consumer and a member of the public,
as an audience for this
material in the past,
the sort of common vernacular for a lot of New Zealanders is life jacket,
but we've got a very open mind.
Thank you. Okay, cool.
Other questions?
Still got a little bit of time. Look, I'm going to ask one.
You've given us some stats on drownings on small watercraft and
drownings on larger watercraft in terms of more or less
than six meters in length. One thing that we haven't got in those stats is
the circumstances which that-- I know that's an unfair question to say, do you
know what happened to all these situations?
But do you have any idea how many of those, or roughly what proportion of those
might have been in situations where a vessel's underway or not underway?
Yeah, look, we-
I can imagine there could be a lot of circumstances where some vessel
was at anchor and somebody falls off it and drowns
for whatever reason there might be.
Yes.
They might have been under the influence of something.
Yeah, but-
So if we don't have anything, we may be making a judgment on a
circumstance which we're not clear about.
Yeah, look, that certainly happens, but the majority are definitely
when vessels are underway. Look, we had a quick look at our data
yesterday and our data team did a great job
looking at the numbers very quickly.
And then in the cases where there is clear data, more than
90% of those or 95% of those were when vessels
were underway.
And you see from us and our sector colleagues, we're all very aligned around the
underway piece. There will still be really tragic
cases where people aren't, but the majority are.
So I guess the question then is, is there any pattern of what's going
on with-- Because we're going to have to ask the question about scope with
respect to if we've got a number of submissions, even if
we were in mind to go down that track for beyond six meters,
because that, again, as we've had to go with change of scope,
for age, that would also bring into play a change of
scope issue as well if we go beyond six meters, I would have thought.
We'll get some advice on that. But it would be useful to actually
understand a little bit more about the circumstances of
those drownings for vessels which are
over six meters, particularly if it becomes quite large recreation vessels.
Yeah, look, we'd have to dig into that.
It's a very big data set, as you'll understand.
Yeah, no, I can understand that. Yeah.
Yeah. So I can't give you an answer directly right now.
Okay. Okay, shame.
So I can just ask another. Is it true that the Australian legislation
is 4.8? That is, that they do-
Oh, it's different in different areas.
So, from my understanding, Tasmania has a six-meter
rule, quite similar to the one that's been proposed here, and other states have
slightly different. So it's not actually common,
which obviously it's an issue we want addressed here because we have that
regionalization at the moment, which is confusing.
Thank you.
Okay. I don't see any other submissions. So look, thank you very much.
Thank you for bearing with the technology.
I'm really appreciating the work you've done.
And look, if there's anything else that you can give us in terms of data,
that would be great, about those
drownings on larger watercraft in particular.
Yep.
What actual circumstances we're talking about and
what's
going on there will be really useful.
We'll also ask
that.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Thanks. Right.
Okay. We have now got Graeme Eichler.
Graeme, nice to see you. Always good to see you.
Am
I first time before this committee?
Certainly in a while. And look, it might be, actually.
Yeah, I've probably done-
I've seen you before other committees
... once or twice before, but several terms ago.
Okay. Now, sadly, we've only got you down for five minutes, but-
That's okay
...
I will
give you a call with about two to go and-
Yes
...
away you go. Yep.
Happy to take questions at any time.
My submission is the one where I'm going to say the word life jackets once
probably, and I'll probably be the only person, only time I say it.
You seem to have heard a lot of submissions and the fact that the submission
period has been going on long has meant I've been able to read a large number of
them and you seem to have the information you need to make some suggestions.
My suggestion is not what you should do about the rules or
the lengths and all those sorts of questions.
I think you've got the evidence you need and be able to probably get some more.
It's if you are going to do something, how should you do it?
And the simple fact is
this isn't legislation.
Mm.
Or at least isn't primary legislation.
This is something that cabinet could do in a few weeks if it wanted to.
And that's the process that these types of things should go through.
These are rules like the
driving rules and things like that, that go to Order in Council, and there's
nothing in the bill as drafted that suggests it needs to
be in a bill.
And that is one of the potential solutions too.
You've been discussing matters that might be out of scope.
The bill as introduced was-Craft lengths of less than
six meters. And the question, well, if we
change that to eight meters or if we extend it to all pleasure craft or something,
would that be out of scope?
I don't know the answer to that, but if your view is to
look at this,
form your view as to what the appropriate regulation should be, and at
the end recommend, this bill does not need to pass, but here are the
changes we would make to the rules.
We ask the House to recommend them to the government.
Cabinet gets a paper a
few weeks after you've finished your deliberations, and
it goes to an order in council. And that would mean that you could
make recommendations which are out of scope because it wouldn't be amending
a bill that had been introduced. The normal
process for changing these rules should be cabinet makes a decision and
it goes through the executive council.
But there's absolutely a place for a committee to look at something like this.
And, I've listened to some of your submissions previously and this
morning. I've read a lot of them. And this is the type of thing that select
committees do really well, and it's the type of thing that does not need to be
connected to a bill. This is something, someone got
lucky and had their bill drawn out of
the biscuit tin. This is the type of thing the committee could have looked at.
Actually, we should hold an inquiry on that.
And this would've been a great one, and you've got lucky in the sense that it was,
in a sense, forced on you by decisions.
But
this sound like there has been some good discussions, but my
simple point is this does not need to be legislation which passes
through three more readings in the House.
I'm going to pick one quick question, which is, if we were to go down the track
you're suggesting and a cabinet, whether it's this cabinet or another
cabinet, whatever, decided they go, "Actually, no, we don't want to do that." They
are the executive. We are
reporting back to the Parliament.
The Parliament may have a different view to the executive.
Is there an issue there if the executive says
no, and the Parliament said, "Well, actually, we disagree with you."
Is that constitutionally a-
Yeah.
That would be something that could happen and that would be the circumstances
where I think if Parliament wants it, like the government has said, "No, we're not
going to do it." Perhaps,
future coalition negotiation reasons or whatever, Parliament could insist,
and that would be the times when this sort of bill might be needed.
It's like-
Okay. No, that's cool. I better do quickly for Simon and then Celia.
And then Tracy.
Thanks, Graeme. Look, helpful suggestion, but is it not the case that
the original bill intended to
reduce the risk of harm to children and young people on small vessels,
now the committee's considering making this a much
wider control over how
people operate their vessels, whether they wear a life jacket or not.
Isn't it fair to say that
while a government can change the rules, we also need to hear
from all of the groups that have an
interest in this. And, I was at the boat show on the
weekend. Tens of thousands of people-
Let's keep it quick, Simon
Sure. There was tens of thousands of people there looking at buying boats and
gear. I'm pretty sure that most of them would go out on their vessel on the
weekend.
Question.
Some of them would wear a life jacket, but not all of them.
Isn't the whole purpose of having this type of inquiry in
this committee to actually let everyone have a say?
Absolutely. I think having this sort of inquiry is great.
It's just the end result, my suggestion is, doesn't need to be a bill, it could be
a rule instead, and the rule-making process could go through.
I'll take Celia.
Quickly. Thank you, Graeme.
Are there any other
acts that you know of that only amend secondary
legislation?
And if you don't know now, maybe you could let us know.
There would be acts certainly which repeal it.
But as a general, I'm sure
it's happened,
but it would be exceedingly rare because-- Yep.
Thank you.
Okay.
That was exactly the-
All good. Right. Graeme, always a pleasure. Thank you very much.
Okay, now we've got Catherine McNair.
Again, via-- Oh, look at that, perfect timing.
Again, via video.
Catherine, welcome. Lovely to see you there.
We've got you down for five minutes.
You can take your submission as read, but if there's things you want to highlight,
go for it. We better get you off mute.
And I'll get your time started. I'll give you a call with two to go.
Off mute.
Off mute. Off mute, Catherine.
You're ready.
Yep, now you're good.
Good morning, Mr. Foster and members of the
committee. Good to be back so swiftly, and I
absolutely commend the swiftness with which this
has come through. As you can see from my submission,
this has been a
very personal thing in that I put a bill into the biscuit
tin two years ago hoping to make this change to
Maritime Transport Act 1994,
rule part 91.4, and add a B
in there rather than compulsory carriage of life jackets, that all
vessels six meters and under, PFDs in brackets life jacket,
to be worn at all times while underway.
Now, one of the questions that has come up several times,
as you can see from the back of my submission, I've been
doing a bit of teaching and stuff around boats for-
Mm
... five years or so,
is the definition of underway, which simply means
floating free. You are cast off.Making
way is when you're actually steering a course.
Now, those are standard maritime definitions, so
we don't need to get complicated about people drifting and
drift fishing in lakes and stuff. They are making a
course. They're floating free.
If they are using any methods of steerage, making way, but
once they are underway, in other words, floating free, they must have their
life jackets on.
So,
if you look through my concerns, one of the things has been is
that as an educator and someone who moves around the
countryside a lot, seven different life jacket rules,
when carriage is the only one in the national legislation, it's been
confusing, and confusion leads to
poor compliance. So,
at point seven, to have such inconsistency means that the
legislation is falling short of the intention, making those who are on the
water safe. In other words,
undermining
compliance by poor bylaw drafting. Okay.
So some are six meters and under, some are under
six meters.
So, the thing is, let's get it national.
We know that that's the size of boat where people die most.
It's not always by drowning.
It can be hypothermia or any other number of events around a
boat. We've had a lot of talk about drowning, not necessarily about
drowning.
I want to draw your attention to the graph on page
two of my submission, which is
the stats. It's a graph of stats from
the Tasmanian experience where they changed their
legislation. It's self-evident what a
huge difference it has made to make this one
small change.
Mm.
And then beneath that,
at the last hearing as well, we had this discussion
about
life jackets and PFDs. Well, personal floatation,
life jackets, all the same thing, but what I've done there is provide you a
link into the Maritime New Zealand website,
which shows you what is fit for what purpose.
Because they all have New Zealand standards,
and it tells you there what's fit for what purpose.
So really, apart from questions-
We've got about a minute and a half left. Yeah, okay. Questions. Yeah.
Yep. Questions. Fine.
Okay.
Okay. Questions, colleagues?
No, very clear.
Very clear. Can I just ask one question?
So you've also got attached the
official information-
Yes
... and we've got particularly, which is useful for our
consideration.
Absolutely. Yeah.
That is the whole list of all drownings,
2015 through to whatever the date is at the end.
Can we make that boating deaths, not drownings?
Oh, sorry. Sorry, sorry, sorry. Yes. Okay.
Boating deaths, please.
Drownings associated with, but it is drowning associated
with-
Some will be drownings, but some will be other
things.
Yeah. Okay. But it gives us a bit of a feel for what
happened then.
Yes, absolutely. And, I've worked
as a safe boating advisor for Maritime New
Zealand. I first came on board in 2004.
So I've had a chance to watch all these various
iterations of legislations and bylaws go through, and now is
the time to make a change. Very simple, adding
one
little
clause to an already existing bill.
Thank you, Catherine. I think we are good, and we're almost
at time anyway. So thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Thank you for all that you've done.
You will be seeing me back for Jet Boating New Zealand in about an hour's
time.
Okay. We'll see you soon.
Okay.
Right. Okay. Now we've got, right-
We don't have the next submitter, but we've got the New Zealand Marine Industry
Association.
I thought I saw Roger Thompson flash up there.
It might have been us saying that he wasn't there.
Oh, not there. Okay. So who have we got next, then?
New Zealand Marine Industry Association.
Right. Okay.
Right.
We'll need
to accept the request. And that's that. Right.
Are
we still waiting for them to-
Yeah, he's accepted now.
Yes. Good. Right.
Okay, so.
Right. Who have we got there? Right. Peter.
Yes. Good morning. Peter Busfield.
I'm advocacy consultant to the New Zealand Marine Industry
Association.
Peter, I'll just tell you, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
It's a very short submission, so if you don't need 10 minutes, that's great.
Gives time for others. That's fine.
But I'll give you a call if you're still going at four, for questions.
So away you go.
Sure. Sure. And we'll keep it simple.
So I'll just reiterate some key points.
And personally, I have been part of the Safer Boating Forum for the
25 years it's been in existence, chaired by Maritime New Zealand,
so have had some experience in boating safety.
In fact, it's part of our mission statement of the Marine Industry Association
to promote safe boating. We have 520 members that
design, build, and store boats. So our members have a close
interrelationship with the users of boats, the
customers of the marine industry.
We support a bill
thatRequires all people
on a vessel under six meters
underway to have to wear a life jacket.
Background to some of those points.
2 million people go boating every year.
It's by far the largest recreational activity of New Zealanders,
more so than football, walking, jogging, rugby, anything else.
More people go boating than any other recreational activity.
So there's 2 million people that go boating every year.
Unfortunately,
there seems to be a historic average of 17 fatalities a year,
which is not nice.
But putting into perspective,
over the years,
the authorities, including ourselves, have promoted
safe boating,
and by and large, most boaties have a culture of safe boating.
So I don't think we have a huge
problem
in the system. In fact, through that good promotion of Maritime New
Zealand, Coastguard New Zealand, ourselves, NZ Marine,
Sports Fishing Council, that's all the fishing clubs, Yachting New Zealand, all the
sailing clubs, Water Safety New Zealand, Jet boating New Zealand, Drowning
Prevention, the Kayak Association, and the list goes on,
have linked up together for the last 20 years, decided what the key safety
messages are,
and that has come across well to the community and has been accepted.
And that is demonstrated by the high percentage of recreational boats that
carry life jackets on board for every person. It's over the 90%.
It never used to be like that.
And there is voluntary, a lot of wearing of life jackets in small
open boats and kayaks and the like.
So it's not a huge inherent problem.
What we're trying to do is fine-tune it to save another three or four more lives a
year, which we totally support.
Most of the lives lost are on boats under four meters in length.
So we're talking under 14-foot boats in my old language, and they're
generally in dinghies, kayaks, small boats.
It's the type of thing that a dinghy goes out, and the gentleman, or usually a
gentleman,
is pulling in a fishing net and stops you two and gets tossed out.
They should be wearing a life jacket.
Mm-hmm.
So the people who cross bars, they should be wearing a life jacket.
The current law actually requires it because the current law requires you to wear a
life jacket unless the skipper deems it safe to take it off.
But the advantage of making it compulsory is that fellow boaties will better see
a small boat going, crossing a bar, someone going out in a kayak or a
dinghy, and if they're physically not wearing a life jacket, there'll be peer
pressure from other people just saying or reminding, "Hey, the law is you've got to
wear a life jacket." It also makes it easier for the 15 and
16-year-old teenagers, which can drive a boat without a
license, but hopefully they're well in charge
and they've got to wear a life jacket rather than the big macho
thing, we don't need it. So, we support for vessels under six meters,
we think it would be good.
Underway is necessary because when a boat is anchored up in a small
bay and you're having lunch or having a sleep in the afternoon
and kids are going to sleep, you don't have to wear a life jacket because you're
in a safe situation. So when a vessel's underway, that means
it's
not tied to anything, it's drifting, or it's motoring or
sailing. That should be the designation
to make it clear that you can take your life jacket off
if you're in an anchored position under control
and it's safe.
So I think those are the key things that we just wanted to reinforce
and we do note there's going to be a bit of complication about the
measuring,
the six meters at waterline length.
I've seen the latest bill provisions, and it's given a bit of a description
of how to do a horizontal
line up from the front of the waterline to the aft of
the stern. That's technically not the waterline because sometimes the stern goes
past the waterline.
It's like-
So there is a little bit of maybe fine-tuning.
We'd be happy to help with that for the description of that.
But that's not really a major. People understand six meters-
Mm-hmm
... with a boat seven meters overall or
around six, it probably is the general intent.
Simon.
It's quite noisy. Yeah. I think, Peter, I think we're wise to that issue of the
waterline because the waterline changes as well, given depending on how heavy the,
when watches in the boat-
Mm-hmm. Yeah
... as well. So questions, colleagues? I think I see you first.
Thank you. I just wanted to really ask you about the
six-meter limit. I'm just quoting from
Paddler NZ. It says, "Multi-sport kayaks
are often longer than six meters. They're long and narrow
to reduce drag, which makes them very unstable." So
I see those boats from six to six and a half meters are
actually some of the most vulnerable ones.
I'm not a racer. I go a slightly shorter kayak, but
I just wonder whether we've got
that measurement.
And I understand it's not the waterline, it's the overall length is much
simpler and easier to agree, but it does seem that we're missing
a
risky little group.
Yeah. Well, that's a good point, but I will say that it is covered, that I'm sure
the existing law,
that you have to have a life jacket on board for all persons, will remain.
And if that's the case and you're in a racing kayak that's about
40 centimeters wide, the only logical place to keep that life
jacket is on your body, rather than-
That's very
useful, and we might make a note of that. Thank you.
I think you knew that.
Okay. And the other point is just really a question.
The current law is that you have to wear a life jacket on board at
all times unless the skipper deems it safe to take it off.
So the question is, if this bill goes through, will that negate
that actual clause? Because we're actually being in support of it being retained
for vessels over six meters.
That's a useful point to make, too.
Look,
couple of questions from me. One is the
issue of underway,
which we've discussed a bit.
What does that mean? What works for you?
Particularly, we've got the likes of Fish and Game saying
very slow trawling or trawling,
sort of two knots or whatever it might be in a lake,
or drifting, those kind of things.
They're saying, well, they'd like not to have to wear a lifejacket in that
situation. Do you have a view of what underway actually means?
Because others have just said it's simply this, it's adrift.
Yeah, agreed. I've taken external consulting on this from a very
well-learned person this morning, actually.
So
we would support underway. To keep it simple, it means that
if you're not tied up to a wharf, you're not on a trailer, and
you
haven't got anchor down,
then you're underway.
So just drifting is underway?
Correct.
In a small sailboat,
you might not have an engine on, you pull a sail up, and there's no wind, you are
basically drifting.
In fact, you'll drift just with the wind on the mast sometimes.
That's right.
So underway, I've learned that versus making way is
evidently when you've actually got some formal propulsion.
But I think there's a lot of fishing that's done drifting these days,
and probably more dangerous in the fact you can drift beam
on to the seaway and you're more prone
to be at risk when you're drifting sometimes than
when you're under propulsion.
It's so true. Simon.
Quick question.
So what about systems that can keep a vessel
on station using GPS,
rather than an anchor,
but that has the same effect, keeping a vessel stationary or in
place. How do you see those systems in terms of the underway
rule?
Well, that's fine-tuning. That's a very good question.
I'd prefer to keep it simple, that if you're not
anchored or tied up to a wharf, secured
by a line,
then you're underway. Otherwise, you're going to be testing the
centralization, the AI, different remedies for keeping a boat
in the wrong position, and the reliability of that.
Okay, cool. Any other questions that anybody's got?
Just on vessels over six meters, because there've been some people
saying, well, quite a number of people so far have been saying to us they'd like it
to be all recreational vessels.
Do you have any advice for us on that in terms of the
relative risks that there are, or whether that's a good idea, bad
idea? If we did go down that track, we'd have to consider scope
anyway.
Sure.
Look,
from a safety point of view, it depends how far you go.
If you're going to do that, then the reciprocal would be
everyone should wear a helmet whilst we're on a bus or on a
train or a car because there'll be some figures that say if
everyone did that, we'd save a few lives on the road.
It really is going to that extra length that really wouldn't
be accepted from a public point of view.
You'd get rebellion, and the government that brought it in wouldn't be voted
in. It would be so extreme.
So I've tried to answer it simplicity because
a lot of the boating will be done in a 9 or
10 or 15-meter boat,
and internationally, you don't
wear a lifejacket in those situations.
It
would be really over the top. Of course, if that big boat is in
big seas or it's got an engine problem or crossing a bar,
they should be wearing a lifejacket on board, even if it is a big boat.
And I've done that in my own circumstances in very
horrendous sea conditions in my
12-meter boat.
And that's where the skipper
responsibility comes in, that on occasion, yes,
in a large boat, you should put a lifejacket on, but 99% of the
time,
a boat over six meters,
it would be overkill.
Peter, I think that is very helpful. Thank you very much. We really appreciate it.
You're welcome.
Cool. Thank you.
Thanks, Peter.
Okay, now I think we've got Social
Justice
in the room. Right. Okay.
In the room.
Cool.
Hi.
At least we know that you can't freeze.
Well, not-
Yes, I know I couldn't
...
not in technological terms anyway.
That's why I'm here.
Very good. Look, we've got you down for 10 minutes.
I'll give you a call with four to go.
And as you know, we like to ask questions, so in your hands.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa. Thank you for inviting me back
today to speak to you all. My name is Jacqui Foster, and I
am the Chief Executive of Social Justice Aotearoa, and
also I am the Managing Director of Skills for Life,
which is based in Auckland. It is a swim school, and we
teach primary school children water safety and swimming.
Social Justice Aotearoa works across the country advocating for
evidence-based policy that protects lives,
strengthens communities, and closes the gaps where
preventable harm continues to occur.
It is a privilege to appear before you again on a matter that
is not theoretical, but deeply
human.The safety of people on our waters.
I want to begin by acknowledging the committee for the seriousness
with which you have approached this bill.
Your decision to seek permission from the business committee
to consider an out-of-scope amendment, one that
would extend the lifejacket requirement to all
occupants of recreational craft six meters or less
in waterline length, demonstrates a genuine
commitment to evidence, not just to the narrow wording of
the original bill. This is courageous,
principled lawmaking, and it deserves recognition.
The core issue-
We need to get these quoted.
Quoted.
Thank you.
The bill protects children, but the risk profile is
overwhelmingly adult.
The bill as introduced is a good bill.
It is necessary. It will save children's lives, but
it is also incomplete.
The data is not imaginary, it is not contested,
it is not marginal, and it is not overwhelming.
According to Water Safety New Zealand, over the past decade, more than
800 people have died from preventable drowning.
97% of drowning victims are aged
15 or over.
88% are male.
In boating-related drownings, 94% of victims
were not wearing a lifejacket. These are not small
differences. These are the defining characteristics,
drowning
in New Zealand.
When we legislate only for children,
we legislate for the majority of those who
die. When we legislate for adults as well,
we legislate for the reality.
The committee's own evidence confirms this.
Your public notice of 4th March summarized
the situation with clarity.
That single sentence captures the entire problem.
The people who drown are not reckless teenagers.
They are not unsupervised children.
They are adults,
often experienced adults who simply did not have
time to put a lifejacket on once the incident began.
During our submissions, you heard firsthand
accounts of tragedies where adults
drowned because they could not access or don
a lifejacket in the water, while their
children, who were wearing lifejackets, survived.
The contrast is not just compelling, it
is conclusive.
Why small craft matter. Physics does not negotiate.
The bill focuses on recreational craft six meters or less
in waterline length, and focus
is exactly right. These vessels are the
most prone to capsizing,
the most affected by sudden weather changes,
the most commonly used by casual,
occasional, or inexperienced operators,
the most likely to leave occupants in the water with no
time to react.
Once a small boat goes over, the window for
action is measured in seconds,
often fewer than 10.
No one child or adult can
reliably locate, retrieve,
and correctly fit a lifejacket in that time.
The only effective lifejacket is the one already being
worn.
Why a universal rule is clearer, fairer, and
more enforceable.
Yeah. A universal requirement.
Everyone wears a lifejacket on a small craft underway
is not only safer, it is simpler.
It is clear. No need to access age, no gray
areas, no debates on the water.
Enforceable. Compliance is visible from
distance.
Equitable. Every life is valued equally,
regardless of age.
Consistent. Aligns with international best practice in
Australia, Canada, and United States.
We do not rely on parental discretion
for seat belts.
We do not rely on parental discretion for bike helmets.
We do not rely on parental discretion for child
restraints in cars.
We set a standard because the consequences of getting it
wrong are horrific. The same logic
applies here. Responding to concerns raised in
the first reading.
At the first reading, ACT MP Cameron Lukey
suggested that this bill was a solution in search of a problem,
and that only one child would have been affected over the
past decade.
With respect, that argument misunderstands the purpose
of safety legislation.
The fact that a child drowned after removing a lifejacket
with a skipper's permission
is not an argument against regulation.
It is the clearest possible argument for it.
It shows precisely why discretion is not
enough.Public safety
exit-
You've got just on four minutes
But-
To start it. Yeah
... yeah, because tragedies occur in the absence of them.
Seat belts were not introduced because thousands of children were
dying each year. They were introduced because even one
preventable death is too many when the solution
is simple, cheap, and effective. Lifejackets are
no different. The committee's proposed amendment is the right step.
Your willingness to consider extending the requirement to all
occupants is not only justified, it is necessary.
It reflects the evidence you have heard,
the lived experience of rescue personnel,
the recommendations of Water Safety New Zealand, Coastguard New Zealand,
and Maritime New Zealand, the international standards of
comparable jurisdictions,
the moral responsibility to legislate for the
people who are actually dying.
This is not government overreach.
This is not a restriction on freedom.
This is not a burden on responsible boaties.
This is a life-saving standard that costs nothing, harms no
one, and protects everyone.
Social Justice, our recommendations.
Social Justice Aotearoa recommends that the committee retain the
bill's requirement for mandatory lifejacket wear
for under 15,
adopt the proposed amendment requirement
all occupants of recreational craft six meters or less
to wear lifejackets when underway,
maintain existing exemptions to supervised
water sports,
surfboards, and commercial rafting,
ensure that enforcement guidance is clear,
consistent, and nationally aligned to avoid
regional variation. Closing.
This bill, with the committee's proposed amendment, will save lives.
It will prevent families from receiving the phone call that changes
everything.
It will bring New Zealand into alignment with global best
practice, and it will honor the testimony of
those who have lost loved ones and those who
have pulled bodies from the water.
Thank you for your time and your commitment to strengthening maritime
safety. I'm happy to answer any questions.
Jacqui, thank you. And that's really, really beautifully done.
Oh, thank you.
Beautifully written. There's some great things that I'm sure will turn up in
speeches.
Right. Questions, colleagues?
I think you have been so clear.
Oh, that's so handy to have that.
You have made the point absolutely brilliantly. Just one.
Yeah.
You did say you still stick with six meters?
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah. So, and can you just spell out your reasoning for that?
Because we had some people who want to extend, other people who don't.
Yeah. My focus is on the bill and six meters under.
And just because of my area within my swim school, managing
director, and what I've seen, I think that just to be very clear,
six meters and under.
That's because height, presumably that's a risk issue.
Yeah.
Height versus-- Yeah. Okay. Jacqui, really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thanks so much.
Keep up the good work.
Thank you.
Right.
Nick,
we've got you here for
five minutes. We've got your submission, which you can take as read.
Anything you want to
highlight, that's great. I'll give you a call with two to go because we do like to
ask the odd question here or there. Although we didn't have too many questions.
Seemed so clear. Yeah. Right, Nick, in your hands.
Good morning.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear before this committee.
It's fantastic to see that the committee has actually taken feedback on board and
have expanded the scope of their bill.
I support the bill as it stands,
children to wear lifejackets
and recreational craft with six meters and under.
I actually urge the committee to reconsider and strengthen
the bill,
for all recreational craft,
no length-based rules, and to all occupants,
not just children.
Why do I
support these changes? It's based on personal
experience.
It's based on overwhelming evidence from Coastguard and Water Safety
New Zealand, which I believe has been submitted to the committee.
Let's just go to my personal experience.
I'm a very experienced boatie with over two decades
of knowledge. I've done skippers courses.
I've done training on Coastguard.
I'm very safety conscious.
I wear a lifejacket. It's a must on my boat.
Two years ago, I capsized my six and a half meter boat whilst underway.
I had to be rescued, myself and a mate had to be rescued by Westpac helicopter and
Coastguard.
Hmm.
Everything happened extremely fast, as the previous presenter has
said.
I had no time to put on a lifejacket during or
after the incident.
In fact, I didn't have time to grab my EPIRB, which was mounted on my dashboard,
so fast it happened.
To this day, I remember the incident vividly,
and I have replayed in my mind multiple times
for learning experience.
I'm absolutely convinced, and I want to stress this point, that I will
not be appearing in front of this committee if I had not worn my
lifejacket.
My vessel's length is greater than the proposed bill,
and I fall outside of the demographic of the proposed bill.
My learningThrough this experience
has reinforced my view
that accessibility to lifejackets is not enough.
They must be worn by all occupants
on any length of recreational vehicle at all
times when underway.
Coastguard's operational data, I believe they've
submitted to the committee. I just want to share
one or two
stats from there.
From the data,
you can see that 21% of drownings since 2000
were on vessels greater than six meters,
where no lifejackets were worn by
occupants that were not children.
That's a sobering statistic. It falls outside of the proposed
bill.
My conclusion or conclusions that I've drawn from here is
normalizing lifejacket wear for everyone on board a vessel-
Two minutes left, Nick
... is outside of--
is essential for sustained behavior change and for reducing
preventable drownings. I have personally seen too
many boaters not wearing lifejackets.
It should become like wearing a seatbelt in the car.
Wearing lifejackets give rescue services the opportunity to
save you, so you can go home to your whanau.
What would I like to see the committee do or recommend for the committee?
Confirm support for lifejacket wear by all occupants of recreational
craft, not just children.
Remove waterline length as a determinant for who must wear a
lifejacket. And I would like to have the committee use this
opportunity to establish simple,
nationally consistent, behavior-based lifejacket rules that
people can easily understand and follow.
Thank you for the opportunity to present before this committee.
I invite questions.
Nick, thank you. I've got a question there from Celia.
Thank you very much, and we're glad that you're wearing a lifejacket too.
So, thank you.
My question was really-
Six seconds
... what do you think the reason is
that boaties don't wear the lifejackets?
It seems to me that modern ones are fairly comfortable.
There are ones that just inflate on landing in the water.
Do you think there's a myth that they're restrictive and
uncomfortable?
Absolutely. There's an absolute myth that they're restrictive and
uncomfortable.
And I hate to say it as my demographic and age,
we're invincible. We're bulletproof.
People do not
understand and appreciate
what can happen on water and how quickly it happens.
When you're in a car accident, you can stop and take control after the event.
On a boat in water, you can't. It's done.
You've got to treat it beforehand. You've got to do it before.
They're definitely not restrictive.
Personally, I wore the old lifestyle lifejackets and then
when I'm fishing or whatever I do, I wear the horseshoe
lifejacket,
which is not restrictive at all. So
honestly, for me, that's a myth.
Thank you.
Okay. Nick, thank you very much. We really appreciate that, and good to see
that you are here.
Thank you.
As opposed to not.
Well done. Thank you.
Thank you, Eddie. See you.
Right. Thank you. Max,
welcome.
You know the drill very well, so I won't take time to do that, but
good to see you here. Thank you for your submission.
Yeah.
And I will give you call too to go.
Okay. Good morning, Chair, members of the panel.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Looking at one instance of drowning and writing law to apply
it
in a specific instance does not seem right, much
less possible. It would be a perfect world
if people took means to protect themselves.
The tragedies prove
otherwise. While recognizing the need for
lifejackets is a step, we should not be congratulating
ourselves for vigilance if we deny the more weightier
concerns. Whatever the circumstance of any drowning,
causes more common likely, never singular,
such as the Manukau Harbour tragedy in 2022
showed us.
In fact, many drowning causes can be attributable to
many other contributing factors.
I'm not here to argue the toss. The intelligence used
to identify the problem
is often very different to the intelligence used to solve it,
and I disagree with the belief that this narrow lawmaking like this will
offer a solution that will cover the multitude of
incidences
involving drowning.
The pressure today to do something about drowning may present us with haste and
hurry.
I acknowledge that current pressure for action
weighs heavily on lawmakers as much as the public.
If I thought
that wearing a jacket would save lives was
enough, then I might agree. But this policy suffers
from the problem of instrumentalist
policymaking.
The use of the law is a helpful tool in the toolbox of the
lawmaker, but I believe the problem is much
deeperI do not want to
make this topical, but since the advent of Tomorrow
Schools in 1986, schools' commitments
to funding
school pools, and indeed swimming education, have diminished.
While it is only an observation,
I would say the legacy of this policy change has removed the opportunity for
many kids to learn to swim.
Today, with schools cost counting,
there has been
decisions to cut out many things, such as swimming,
as nice-to-haves.
It is no secret swimming education has become fragmented in the last 40
years, along with the subsequent decline of a lot of
pool infrastructure. And the bill has not looked
at the instances of causes of drowning across
the board, and this is a mistake. For instance,
certain bodies of water possess a much greater hazard for swimming
compared to others, such as flooded quarries.
In the States alone, there are 9,000 recorded,
and the figure is much higher.
As a volunteer instructor for a local
learn to swim club, I wonder how
many we are missing from swimming education in our
community.
All of our instructors are volunteers, so
tuition is
subsidized,
but there still has to be a willingness and a support from the parents.
In the past, having schools teach swimming caught a lot of these
families where the willingness was weak or nonexistent.
I've also become accustomed to meeting adults who can't swim, and today
this is not uncommon. I want the state to prioritize investing
in swimming education alongside other
measures in addressing this issue.
Right, we're done? Okay. Right. Cool. Okay, any questions?
I think we're all true.
Yeah. Susan, you're up.
Just want to thank you, and thank you for taking that broad
approach.
Given we don't
directly have a say in educational communication, while
I agree with you and I think councils can help too,
doing this
wouldn't mean
that one couldn't do the other thing, would it?
Yeah, that's right.
So this is a step, but your point is not that we shouldn't do
this-
Yeah
... but there's a lot else to do as well.
Well, I think yeah. I think we have
seat belts and we think it's a good thing having seat
belts, but we don't stop there, and we know that
having seat belts isn't enough to go and prevent the-
The road design. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. Oh, that's really good. Thank you.
No, I think we take your point. It's not
an either/or, it's an and.
Yeah.
Max, thank you. Really appreciate it.
Thanks, Max.
Thank you for your work doing involuntary swimming tuition.
Thank you. Right. Okay. Now we don't have Mr.
Devine,
and we don't have Mr. Thompson either, so I think we will assume that neither of
them are actually going to turn up.
So we are with the
Navigation Safety Group of Harbourmasters next, who are on Zoom
with us.
Grant, nice to see you again.
One moment.
Okay.
All right.
Very good, thank you.
Good to see you again.
Thank you for the opportunity.
We've got you down for 10 minutes. I'll give you a call with four to go.
You can take your submission as read, but please highlight the things you want to
and
we tend to ask questions, so I'll leave it up to you.
I look forward to the questions.
Thank you for the extension of scope.
I think that was a good decision and well supported by the feedback.
Just highlighting, while there are a lot of parties involved in
education and promoting of boating safety, when it comes
to actually regulation and enforcement, there's actually only
two organizations, which is Maritime New Zealand
and regional councils through us as the Harbourmasters.
So we're the little bit of the pointy end of this.
Our goal is to have one consistent rule around the country, and
that's why we're supporting this revised bill.
Six meter length overall is already in place around the majority
of the country within bylaws.
I think you've had a lot of information about why overall length is
actually the practical one. It's one that's known.
It's one that's easy to assess.
It is in line with the current bylaws that have it, and
it's nationally consistent.
A previous submitter had said that length wasn't defined.
Length is defined in the maritime rules, and it is overall
length. Internationally, overall length is a standard as well.
The six meter
discussion, I've heard a bit about that.
Statistically, things go wrong faster in
smaller boats.
The stats do
back that up, and I know Maritime New Zealand have provided you with that
information.
Is six meters the right length? Hard to say.
All boats isn't a workable solution.
It becomes just about unenforceable.
If you've got a 18 meter pleasure boat and people are inside a
cabin, it's aStarts becoming nonsensical.
So, we support the 6-meter.
Whether that needs addressing in the future, that's a different one.
Most bylaws, and I presume Part 91 would
also have one, have an increased danger clause.
If you're doing a bar crossing, if the weather gets bad, if you've
got other problems on board, they all have that
rule about wearing life jackets, an increased
danger.
I heard some discussion about vessels underway.
That is also a well-known and defined terms.
The argument about using electric motors to stay at anchor,
that is a vessel underway because you're using a motor to control the vessel.
Anchored, moored or tied to, physically anchored,
tied to a mooring, or a wharf
are the only times a vessel isn't underway.
And obviously, if you're staying overnight on a boat or something like that,
you're not going to wear a life jacket to bed.
Oh, freshwater, that was the other one.
It was almost suggested that freshwater is safer because you don't
get the rogue waves in there. Freshwater is dangerous
stuff. There is less buoyancy-
Very cold
... the waves chop up bigger.
One of my colleagues, a harbor master down south, in his white water
kayak was surfing on a lake because the weather picked
up unexpectedly.
Please don't be swayed by the fact that if you're on a lake, you're safe.
There are numerous fatalities, and the freshwater is colder.
You end up in the water, your ability to stay afloat gets
worse.
And I'd also say sometimes people
talk about familiarity and ability to swim.
Staying alive after you end up in the water from a boating accident
has nothing to do with your ability to swim.
The water's probably cold. It could be choppy.
You're probably clothed.
Doesn't actually matter how good a swimmer you are.
You've just been dumped in an environment you weren't expected to be in,
and that disorientation
is crucial.
And also picking up on a previous submitter,
I agree, life jackets are not the silver bullet.
This will not stop people dying in small boats.
What it will do is keep them afloat long
enough for help to come to them, for them to be able to
sort themselves, for themselves to have options.
Most of New Zealand boating is done in water that isn't particularly
warm.
That cold water shock without a life jacket, you're in
difficulty straight away.
And I will
invite questions.
I think you have this very, very clear questions, colleagues.
Oh.
Just can you just highlight for us, and we very helpfully got a
list from one of the other submitters, which has come from Maritime
New Zealand under official information, just in terms of all the
drownings that there've been. So we get a picture
of
the length of the vessel, it relates to the length of the vessel.
Most of them are under six, but not all.
But do we have the, the risk, you talked about risk,
and the speed with which things happen with a smaller vessel versus a larger
vessel. But do you have any
data? Because what we don't have is the number of people who actually use a larger
vessel versus are using a smaller vessel
and getting into grief. If we said that 100 people drowned
out of a smaller vessel and 100 people drowned out of a bigger
vessel, but 15 times as many people use the bigger vessel as the
smaller vessel, the risk profiles are not the same.
Do you have any advice for us around that?
And also, it would be useful to understand what a recreational
vessel over six meters might look like, because there'd be
quite a wide range of those sort of things too.
Yeah, there is.
Yeah, the data for that, I think you'd have to
probably pull from a multitude of sources.
What's being sold, what's available.
The 6-meter, it's
the smaller boats, it's the cheaper boats.
Sometimes it's the $100 special off Trade Me.
They tend to be the smaller boats, and that's where you see
difficulty.
But the makeup of the boating fleet, I'm sure
Maritime New Zealand will have it, but I don't have that one to
hand.
I think-
Your 6-meter boat, or your larger boat, it could
have a hard-top cabin or something like that.
Your 7.5 meter
is becoming more common.
Use a brand name, the Stabicraft, the pontoon boats
are a bit bigger.
All of them, things can go wrong. And like I
say, 6-meter might not be
exactly the right point.
Thank you.
But then you start getting up to boats coming out of a marine or a 10 or
12-meter launch,
where
things are less likely to go wrong rapidly on
thatIf you hit a rock, it's going to sit there before it takes
on water. If you have a collision, if something comes
off, there's a little bit more time on those.
There are always exceptions to everything.
And
yeah, like I say, it's not a silver bullet to fix all,
but the six-meter overall length is going to hit
a lot of those issues as has been identified.
Okay.
Just one thing, if I can
share my screen. There was some discussion about...
Oh, okay, maybe I can't.
The other day about different types of life jackets and what they're for and
the-
Yes.
Oh, I can share? Okay, let's try this.
And
we take
used life jackets. We'll check them and send them
out to other people that need them.
And this is, I don't know whether you can see that one.
Yes.
Yes, we can.
This is the sort of information
we give out. There was a question the other day about whether we
should regulate for different types of life jackets,
and I would say to that, no. And sorry, I should be calling them
PFDs, that's just a habit.
You regulate for the use of a PFD, and then you educate
about what the right PFD is. There are too
many variations in there to try and write
rules stipulating
the precise type for different usage.
But that's where the education comes into it.
So just on that, just quickly, if you just said the word is
appropriate, you're required to wear an appropriate flotation device,
whatever that might be. Sometimes it's a wetsuit, sometimes it's
something that doesn't have a collar, sometimes something that does have a collar.
Is that sufficient just to allow the relevant authorities
to just to do that identification of what's appropriate in what
circumstance, do the education and then rather than try and define
it in legislation or even potentially in regulation?
Yeah, it absolutely is. I've seen some of the Australian
rules, and they're incredibly prescriptive.
And
what you'll get is people that won't be compliant with the rules
because they're doing something that's perfectly safe, but it's not quite how
the rule's written.
And where we're at on this journey
is we need to get them nationally worn
consistently so everyone is wearing them.
That would be a huge step. The next step is going to
be that education and refining. And we're doing that all the
time, all the harbor masters,
Coast Guard, and other organizations.
That's where the education comes into it.
But we need that nationally consistent rule to educate against.
Grant, thank you very much. We really appreciate your coming back and the expertise
that you've given us as well. Thank you, and-
Thank you very much
... we're going to. Thanks, Grant.
Okay, we are
going well to time. So we have Jetboating New Zealand. We've got Kathryn.
Back again.
Thank you, Rod.
And Paul Vernall.
I'm here. I'm a stand-in for Paul today.
Oh, so you're both of them. You're back for the two.
No, I'm, my versatility knows no bounds.
Right. Okay.
Rod.
Right. Okay. Away you go.
So,
from the office of Jetboating New Zealand in Upper Riccarton
in Christchurch. As you can see from the submission,
Jetboating New Zealand supports the amended bill in that all
vessels six meters and under,
PFDs, brackets life jackets, to be worn at all times while
underway. And you'll see
Jetboating New Zealand's an organization of
2,600. We were formed in 1962.
We are inland boaters.
That's what we do. We're freshwater boaters.
But we're also very mobile boaters.
A lot of our recreational boating's around going on
trips and boating, maybe eight, nine or 10 rivers in
different parts of New Zealand. We're like caravanners.
We get out and about. And I think we do a huge amount
within the association to promote
life jacket wearing. You have to wear a life jacket
when you're involved with any
Jetboating New Zealand activities,
and that's been a focus for a very long time.
So,
that remains a focus.
So, one of the points that Jetboating New Zealand would like to
make, and this is around the inconsistency issue,
is that
for generally, not just for the organization, that
safety should not be dependent on geography.
In other words, on the West Coast of New Zealand, which is Maritime New Zealand
jurisdiction, you're only required to carry a PFD or
a life jacket. However, in the rest of the South Island,
there are various rules.
So,
we are advocates for our members. We encourage safe jet
boating, foster better relationships with other
stakeholders, and we're out to promote membership
of our
associationMr.
Calder made a point about fresh water, and as
a tutor, I can tell you the most important thing is
fresh water is less dense, therefore it has less
buoyancy, and it forms a steeper wave pattern.
So that's why boating on lakes, particularly
the big South Island lakes where it's really cold and South Island rivers,
there is that added risk factor there.
I think a couple of us have kayaked when we're looking at each other going, "Yeah,
I understand that."
Get that.
Kayak with a sail. Yeah.
Yeah.
It's very exciting.
Yeah. Okay, Catherine, are you very clear?
Anything else you wanted to add, and the others will go to questions.
No.
Okay.
Any questions you have for me.
That is really clear. Just two questions from me, and I don't see any
others yet.
First one of them is the length of jet boats, and I'm thinking here
probably the larger ones, the commercial ones.
What do they get to in terms of length?
Oh, the larger ones are-- Well, actually-
They're all under six meters
... yeah, the recreational ones are generally under six meters.
I mean, 18 foot is a big jet boat for
recreational use. They're two-
What about the ones that we see, the commercial ones?
That's under Rule 82 of the Maritime Transport Act.
They are-
So they're over six meters, but-
A lot of them are, but they have a separate association.
The Commercial Jet Boat Association, Jet Sprinting,
and River Racing are all separate organizations.
We only represent the
ordinary recreational jet boater.
Okay, and so all of those are covered by something else.
They are.
Yeah. So section 82 of the Maritime.
Okay.
80. Rule 80.
Yeah, okay, cool. And then secondly, and thank you again for your
very useful OIA you got from-
Yeah, thank you
... Maritime NZ. That's very useful.
I think there's a couple of other things in there that will be useful is the
circumstance in which the, what sort of water people were on will be useful as
well. But that's okay.
Yeah.
Just looking through that, there are virtually no,
I've seen one at 2017, two,
there are a few, three, four. There are a
number of
jet boat
deaths.
Well, presumably they're described drowning, and I think all of them
seem to have
been wearing life jackets. So presumably it's something, it's
well, have any idea what sort of circumstances are that are
going on there?
No, and I wouldn't comment unless I had the accident report in front of me
because the answers to these things are never
that clear as they first appear.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm going to use that awful phrase, so it's multifactorial.
So there'll be a number of factors in there-
Yeah
... about whatever the conditions on the day, the age of
the person involved. Yeah, it's too broad,
yeah, to-
No, that's fair. Okay, cool. Any other questions?
Otherwise, Catherine, really appreciate it.
Thank you for everything that you've provided us, and thank you for the work that
you do.
Thanks again, Catherine.
A pleasure. Well, as my bill is still sitting in the biscuit tin, it may
now well stay there as redundant.
As a redundant matter. Thank you, gentlemen.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Will look forward to hearing the outcomes.
Yeah. Cool. Okay, and now we have our
last minute. We've got two who are still not there, so they're gone.
Stephen Strong, who is with us.
Stephen, are you there?
Yes. Sorry, just had to click on something.
Okay. Yeah, that's fine.
Can you hear me?
We've got a moment, so that's okay.
Clear that.
Yeah.
Okay.
Something's going on with the computer.
Oh, start.
If we can see you, that'd be great.
Is that better?
Yep. That's fine. That's good.
Yeah. Cool.
Very dark background, but never mind. Or light background.
Oh, sorry about it. I'm sorry about it.
That's okay. No problem. Okay, look, you can take your submission as read.
Thank you very much for that. Thank you for what you've been doing work-wise.
And
I'll give you a call with a couple of minutes to go.
We do like to ask questions, so I'll pass it over to you.
No problem. Thank you very much for having me, and good morning to everyone.
Yeah, just I think as I've been sitting here and the last time
I was on your board of panel to speak and
everything,
everything does get spoken about that I wish to say, so there's no point
in keep going over everything again and again and again.
But has
government ever thought about actually bringing in proper licensing and
rules? I know I'm asking a question for you guys, but
I just feel we keep talking about education and everything,
but I don't think our boaties go out and actually
find out things.
As I say, I'm with Harbour Master and I've been with Coastguard here, and when I'm
out on patrol with Harbour Master,
the general chat with a lot of boaties on here, when
you find them without
no life jackets, you find them speeding, you find them in areas
that they shouldn't be. They have owned these boats for many
yearsBut don't know the rules.
And I think we really, as we keep pointing on about
education and this life jacket business,
our boaties need a license, I feel, to
be able to buy a boat, to be able to buy a jet ski.
Because as I say,
just coming across too many boaties and jet skiers that just don't
know general normal rules of the lake
and rivers around us and to try and
get them to try and be educated around life jackets.
Well, if we can't educate them
about where they should be going, what speed they should be
doing and everything on the water, how are we going
to get them to
buy life jackets?
A lot of things are no-brainers. It's like, as I say,
I'm here in Taupo. I know we keep beating on about the six-meter
boats, but a seven-meter boat and an eight-meter boat out here,
when they're towing their children on the back of biscuits and skis and they're
going at a fair old rate of knots and they're spinning and
turning,
and these mum and dads that are watching their children that have got their life
jackets on because they're on the biscuit and they're on the ski, haven't got
theirs, and they can twist and turn these boats so quickly that they can come out,
they can twist too far and too quickly.
And, yeah, I'm a firm believer that
really and truly any boat that can be towed to our lakes,
whether it be six to seven to eight to nine, some of these
wake boats,
our boaties in private boats should be made to wear life jackets
once they're underway, once they're towing and once they're enjoying themselves.
So I suppose that's my submission,
because I've been here and unfortunately I've been on the receiving end
of retrieving six deceased here since 10
years, so I don't want any more.
So yeah, that's
my thoughts.
David,
thank you. And as I said, thank you for the work that you've done and
we hope you don't have to-
Yeah
... for sure anybody else.
And the stories are actually very helpful as well, the situations that you've been
in because it does help us to tell stories too.
Colleagues, questions?
Well, I guess it-
Councillor, yeah.
It's really, I thank you very much for your, and I'm sorry
to hear what you've had to do.
This question of length, we do seem to be getting
different perceptions about risk
at the next level up. And
I just wondered, I hear you very clearly say
that
there's still significant risk. I guess the question is
how would you suggest we weigh that up,
given we're hearing different things from different places?
With the boats that I come across here on the lake, they're
gym palaces. They're state-of-the-art ski boats
and
yeah, they're all lovely. They're big speakers, they're really enjoyable boats.
But when I approach these people to speak to them to make sure
they've got enough life jackets on that vessel, even though they're over the six
meters, I always try and educate them
to see if they've got enough life jackets for everyone on board,
which some don't, and that's another problem.
Where are these life jackets? Well, they're actually underneath the seats.
So if something does happen, they spin round, there's no
way they can get them quick enough.
In a disaster, they will have
life jackets for small children. They will have life jackets for themselves, large
adults. You try and organize and get
everyone to stand up on the boat,
get those life jackets out from underneath the seats and try and sort them out,
who has what and which size fits one.
It's just a nightmare. So hence why I say on our
lake here,
once you're underway, wear the bloody things.
That's it. So, yeah, that's my argument.
It's all too easy.
Thank you.
That's very clear. Look,
we're slightly ahead of time, so I will ask one question more and it's you've
alluded to the different size and not cutting off at six meters, but
extending it beyond that. We've had submissions, you might have heard
Grant Alder, who's the harbormaster down in Wellington
before just saying, look, the risk with smaller vessels is
greater because often they're not as good or they are more likely
to tip over and they do things quicker.
Yeah.
And the practicalities of some of the wearing jackets in
a larger vessel.
Do you have any comment from your perspective on that, just briefly?
No, I think one rule should fit all.
I don't believe it should just be six meters.
As I say,
we're on a party
lake with so many size boats that spin
quickly and everything. Look, Coast Guard and harbormaster, we're on
12-meter plus boats. We have to wear them.
We have to work with them on ourselves. It doesn't hinder us.
The argument to say they do is
just silly. Half these times when they're
towing their children and everything, it doesn't hurt wearing a life jacket.
Yes, stop, anchor up, take them off, enjoy yourselves, have a drink and everything.
But once you go in, let's put them on.
It's a no-brainer for me.
Sorry.But yes, I do understand smaller boats are
less balanced to larger ones, but end of the
day, you're still going to get in difficulty.
So if you've got them on,
you've got them on,
just like wearing a seatbelt.
Stephen, we really appreciate it.
Thank you very much, and again, really appreciate the work that you do.
Thank you very much. Thanks for your time.
Thank you.
Okay, colleagues.
Okay.
Do you want a break for a couple of moments?
Uh,
petition hearing
.
Yeah, we get the submission done first.
Right. Okay.
Right.
So
team, you're happy to do this submission, seeing they're there.
Thank you.
Take some water.
Yeah.
Right. We'll just get ourselves in order. Simon.
Where's Simon? He's back. Right. Excellent. Well done, Simon.
What we'll do is we'll take a wee quick
five minutes after this one, I hope, if we've got a moment.
Might just about do that.
We will.
We'll see how we go. Right, okay. Welcome. Thank you.
If you want to do another
intros, we've got... And then
anything you wanted to talk to us about, and then
we'll ask you some questions. But we've got this session down for 10
minutes.
So I will put the clock on, and away we go.
Cheers.
Kia ora. Kia ora.
My name is Patrick, and as a disabled person, I rely on
public transport to get around Pōneke, which is made more
accessible with the community services discount scheme.
We at Free Fares call on the government to provide free public transport
for four key groups, with these being under 25-year-olds,
tertiary students, community service card holders, and total
mobility card holders, as well as their support people.
Free Fares is a coalition made up of over 100 different member
organizations, with these ranging from councils,
churches, environmental groups, and other NGOs.
We started a petition to stop the public transport price hikes,
which is why we're here before you today.
We originally started back in late 2021 with Free Fares as a
response to the then Labor government ending their free public
transport scheme after the COVID
restrictions. With the worsening cost of living
crisis, people have long been struggling to make ends meet, with
young people and the disabled being particularly vulnerable to these
financial constraints.
Free public transport allows people to get to work and school easier,
while also being able to freely participate in their community.
All of these things are an investment, and it also helps to tackle the
climate crisis, as 20% of New Zealand's carbon
emissions comes from transport, and 70% of
these alone come from private vehicle ownership.
Public transport is a fundamental way to tackle climate change,
as it addresses the systemic issue.
Giving under 25s free public transport access
especially helps to normalize this mode of transit from a young age.
This can then be passed down to future generations in the long term.
Kia ora Patrick. Tena koutou. I'm Frances Mountier,
also from the national organizing team for Free Fares.
And I don't have a car, and I have two children, so when they were little, we
relied entirely on the bus. And the more
recent introduction of half-price fares for those of us who are community
service card holders has made a huge difference.
We also have a member who pays $50 a week per high
schooler, so $100 just to get her kids to access their
state schooling.
And we launched in November 2021. We petitioned against the fare
hikes early in 2025, uh-Obviously, the
situation has gotten worse since then, as we all know.
The war in Iran, the blockade of the Strait of Hormuz has shown both
how reliant we are on fossil
fuels,
and we already needed to get off them, but also how necessary it will
be to conserve fuel.
And because of that, and earlier reasons, the costs of living pressures
on Whanau are phenomenal right now.
One of our member organizations, Parents for Climate Aotearoa, have
a open letter calling for free public transport for all school
students,
and to reinstate all rural school bus routes to
make sure that tamariki can, rangatahi can continue to access their
education through this coming winter or these coming months.
Kia ora Francie. Thank you. Kia ora koutou. My name is Antonio.
I am a student and also the policy researcher for Free Fares,
and I commute to and from Kapiti
pretty much every day of the week, paying $80 a week on public transport.
So thank you, Francie, for talking about public transport as a cost of
living relief measure. But I also want to impress upon this
committee that public transport brings benefits to wider
society, not just to those who use it.
So one key benefit that public transport brings, even to
non-users, is reduced congestion on our roads.
Congestion is a rising problem
in our cities throughout the country, costing the New Zealand economy
billions of dollars a year,
and it's getting worse.
And so public transport is incredibly important for moving large amounts
of people and reducing pressure on our road network.
For example, here in Wellington City, in some transport corridors
during on peak,
buses comprise about 2% of vehicles, but can carry
50% of the passengers.
And it is precisely where there are few alternatives to driving
that traffic volumes are rising the fastest.
So public transport can really help counteract the cost
of congestion and raise our productivity as a country.
The fuel crisis is also very topical.
Public transport has
great potential to help us conserve our fuel in times of crisis
like we have now. For one, a lot of the public transport
fleet is electrified. Here in Wellington, for example, a quarter of the buses are
electrified.
And even comparing fuel using buses to private
vehicles, yes, a bus may use more fuel per
kilometer than a private vehicle, but it can carry 10, 20,
30 times more passengers or more. And so this
allows us to really get more bang for our buck from
our fuel.
There are also benefits often overlooked in terms of public health.
Air pollution is a big silent killer in this country.
A University of Auckland report tossed up the
social cost of air pollution in terms of hospital admissions and the like,
and it's about $15 billion a year. We have
over 2,000 premature deaths in New Zealand due to air pollution,
largely due to private vehicle emissions, and so greater public
transport use can help fix this problem as well.
And so the direction that we have gone in
of imposing private share targets to public transport
authorities, and raising fares as a result of that is really
an opportunity cost. It's a missed opportunity for our country to
decarbonize, and it's a missed opportunity for us as a
whole country to benefit economically and socially from public
transport.
Kia ora. And we know many around this table value the
Super Gold Card, and there is research that shows how many
trips were enabled,
how that helps with accessing healthcare,
connection-
You've got about three and a half minutes left.
Whanau. We are grateful that this committee in particular, rather
than the Petitions Committee, is hearing today's
petition.
We want to mention that Total Mobility card holders are about to face
a three whole price hike, reduced government
subsidy, reduced fare cap from some regional councils, and of course, the price of
fuel. Anything in your power to roll that back, please
do. Obviously, we always believe free fares is important, but we want
to urge this committee
to
ask the government to make fares permanently free for the four
groups who need it most.
Ooh.
Which is students under 25, community service card holders,
halfway there on that one, and Total Mobility card holders and their support
people, and also free for the duration of the fuel
crisis. Kia ora.
Right. What I'm going to do is go one, two, three.
We've got two and a bit minutes left.
Yeah.
Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, and I was there when your petition was received.
That was last year. Obviously, at that time, you were calling for this.
The context of the current environment is very different.
What is your observations around the uptake of
PT as a result of the current environment?
Noting that
when your petition was lodged previously, it was a different environment.
Yeah, it is increasing, but there are also trips people are not
taking. There are literally tamariki who can't get to school at Omatai
because they live in Lower Hutt. So we are partly an
equity campaign, so it isn't just that
price pressures are pushing people onto public transport, but we worry also about
those who literally don't travel at the moment and in the coming months.
Sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Question
Why should a tradie paying rucks on their ute or a
family paying fuel tax for their vehicle subsidise someone else's
off-peak train fare in Wellington? Which is essentially what you're proposing.
Yeah, that's a very fair question.
So
as I outlined in my section, there are wider benefits to
society from greater public transport use, even for those who don't use it.
In terms of increased productivity for our country, in terms of
lives not lost, in terms of
increased employment outcomes for those who may travel
off-peak.
Sure. But my question was why should a tradie who's
running around in their ute or van be paying
extra
for somebody to use transport off-peak when the benefits you've
described are not there?
The tradie I met recently, they are staggering their work
to be located close to where they are, and I got the
sense they would be pleased of any kind of fuel conservation that
benefits everyone. There has been some money
available towards this current fuel crisis.
We're calling for some of that to go towards public transport
that conserves fuel for tradies, for rural populations who
will really struggle if we come to
diesel shortages. But it's a method to conserve it
for users across the motu.
Okay. I've got 30 seconds left.
Thank you. So just following on with that particular one, you say
more public transport use would really pay for itself
and reduce congestion at peak hours, but that the
issue of the off-peak,
it's more about fuel conservation. Would that be fair?
And equity. The four groups that we always work for are those who
are most experiencing transport poverty, even in late
2021.
It would be fair to say that not all Gold Card
holders, and I'm the one that has the evidence of this-
... are
in nearly as much need as students and people on
community service cards.
But we're a sort of additive campaign, so we love the benefits that Gold Cards
has delivered, but we want to see that rolled out to these other four groups who
most need it as well, Kelvin.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Our time is concluded.
Very good.
So we will have a look at this and see what we can do.
Oh, yeah.
There are three-
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Be a lot cheaper than building more lanes.
Exceptional work, Mr Chair.
We try. We try.
I don't like leaving people outside even if I don't have to.
Welcome.
Hey, how are you?
Good. Feel good. Come up and grab all...
The whole team around the table's fine.
Who needs to be-
Good
... at the table.
Questions?
Oh, did they put a chief in? Sorry.
If anybody, you want to have any of the rest of your team around the table as well,
then-
Just offered
... so we've got a bit of space there, so.
Yeah. Just offered. Very frightened.
Okay. We're not that scary. Okay. Right. Welcome.
It's great to have you here. We always enjoy these
conversations. Energy is such a huge issue at the
moment. I had somebody say to me, I've used this a few times, somebody in the
industry, not a generator, say to me, "Electricity or energy is
3% of the economy, but it's also 100% of the economy." Without it,
we haven't got anything really. So what you do is really important.
Thank you for being here. We'll just hand it over to you for any
introductions and introductory comments, and then-
Thank you
... we'll ask questions. And we will ask lots of questions, I know that.
Well, thank you very much.
Well, I always go to you first on this particular matter.
Getting there.
So we'll start there. Right. Okay. Barbara, away you go.
Thank you. Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you, Chair, and members
of the committee for the opportunity to appear before you today.
I'm Barbara Chapman, Chair of Genesis Energy.
I'm joined by Malcolm Johns, who you will know, our Chief Executive,
and Matthew Osborne, our Chief Corporate Affairs
Officer, and a reluctant Matt Ritchie sitting in the background.
I just want to make some brief opening remarks before I pass over
to Malcolm, and then we look forward to any questions that you may
have of us.
Genesis understands the responsibilities that come
with delivering secure energy to hundreds
of thousands of homes and businesses across the
country, and with being a major electricity
generator with our unique role in New Zealand's
energy system.
Genesis's Gen35 strategy is very much
focused on helping our customers lower their
total cost of energy by investing around 2
billion in new renewable generation and storage
and supporting the sector and the country with energy
security.
Our 60/95/100 framework is simple.
If New Zealand wants to lower total energy
costs-Strengthen energy independence and
meet our emissions goals, then around
60% of energy demand needs to be met
by electricity.
At least 95% of that electricity needs to come from
renewable sources, and electricity needs to be
available 100% of the time regardless of
the rain or the wind or the sun conditions.
If we achieve that as a country, then homes and
businesses across New Zealand will ultimately pay
less for their overall energy.
New Zealand's electricity system is highly renewable, but it's
also weather dependent. Since we met here last
year, periods of low hydro inflows, lower
wind generation, and faster than expected gas
decline have again highlighted the importance of
flexible generation that can run when the country needs
it.
Across FY '25, Genesis generated more than
6,000 gigawatt hours of electricity, and in the first
half of FY '26, around 3,000
gigawatts across our hydrothermal and
contracted renewable portfolio.
The important point is not simply how much we generated,
but that we were able to generate and manage fuel
flexibility when the market conditions required it.
Looking ahead to this winter, New Zealand is
significantly better placed than it was a year ago.
Hydro storage, gas storage, and coal stocks are
stronger.
New generation is coming online, and the Huntly Firming
Options arrangement, supported by the other large
generators, will help ensure critical dry year
cover remains available. But this is not a
reason for any complacency. The system still needs
timely investment in renewables, storage,
flexibility, demand, and firming capacity.
That brings me to affordability.
We recognize that overall energy costs
matter a lot to households and businesses.
About 70% of New Zealand's total energy does not
come from electricity, which means non-electric
energy is still the largest part of the total energy bill
for the majority of homes and businesses.
While the cost of electricity
certainly matters, the bigger prize is lifting
electricity from about 30% to about
60% of New Zealand's total energy use.
Doing that will lower overall energy costs for
homes and for businesses.
Recent global events have provided a sharp reminder that
energy security is economic security.
New Zealand's opportunity is to power more of our
economy with the electricity we can generate
here at home.
That's also the practical path to lower carbon's future.
Our recent 400 million equity raise, supported by our
majority government shareholder, and thank you to anyone in the room who was
part of that,
enables Genesis to accelerate investment in electricity
generation and storage while maintaining the
flexible capacity the system needs
to work towards those goals.
Genesis delivered strong performance in FY '25
and in the first half of FY '26.
But that performance is the result of doing the fundamentals well,
supporting the security of supply, investing in
affordability over time, and helping New Zealand
decarbonize in a reliable and practical way.
I'll now hand over to you, Malcolm.
Thank you, Barbara. Ngā mihi, everybody.
As Barbara has
set out the broader context, I would like to build on
that by focusing on what Genesis is doing in practice to improve
security, affordability, and a lower carbon future.
The starting point is that New Zealand's electricity transition
is really an energy transition. As Barbara noted,
about 70% of energy New Zealand uses today
still comes from sources other than electricity,
and roughly half of our total energy is
imported. That leaves households, businesses, and the
wider economy more exposed than they need to
be to global price shocks and supply disruptions as
we are seeing play out at the moment.
This is why Genesis is focused on electrification.
The prize is very significant. Materially
lower total energy costs, greater energy
independence, the practical path towards meeting our
legislated net zero 2050 target.
Sunlight needs to travel about 150
million kilometers to reach New Zealand,
but it never once has to go through the Strait of Hormuz.
Neither does wind or rain.
New Zealand's opportunity is to power more of our
economy with electricity we generate here at
home.
For households, that translates into savings of
about $2,000 a year in today's
dollarsAt a national level,
moving electricity from 30% to
60% of our total energy would save around
$10 billion a year in today's dollars.
It is not only about the unit price of electricity,
it is about lowering the total cost of energy across the
entire economy.
That is also why we think electrifying our economy
matters so much. For many households,
electrifying transport is a bigger prize, for example,
than rooftop solar alone because it can displace a
very large share of imported fuel use.
The common thread is that using more domestically generated
electricity reduces exposure to international
commodity prices and strengthens our resilience.
Just as importantly, we are investing in flexibility.
New Zealand needs a system that is not only more renewable and
more resilient,
it needs more storage, responsive demand,
thermal backup where required, and commercial arrangements
such as the Huntly firming options that keep critical
reserve generation in the market.
That is the strategy Genesis is pursuing.
For our customers, lowering the total cost of energy.
For our generation, adding more renewables into it.
And for energy security, ensuring that we put products in
the market that maintain not only reserve generation,
but also reserve fuel to power that generation.
And with that, I'd like to open up to the committee for questions.
Right. Colleagues, I know there's going to be a lot of questions, so what I'm going
to do is I'm going to take three questions each, and I'll keep rotating around.
Okay, so I'm going to start Megan, Dan, Scott, me.
The stage door opened. Okay, right.
I-
First one that asked the question.
See, look, I... Tania, do you have any questions?
Better get in.
Oh, Megan.
Okay, I'll go around. I'm just going to go around the table if everybody's got
them. So away you go, Megan. Start away.
Okay.
Away you go.
Thank you. And thank you for your presentation.
And want to pick up on energy independence and
energy we can make right here in New Zealand, and jump
straight to the Rankine unit and the trial you've been
doing with biomass
that you've been doing there.
What
are the costs looking like
per gigajoule for running the Rankine on biomass?
Yep. So we've been investigating biomass domestically and
internationally for the last 18 months or so.
We can confirm that through that investigation, the
technology for producing biomass, which is effectively
dehydrated charcoal in a pelletized form.
The engineers will roll over when I describe it that way, but it
is effectively taking as much moisture out of wood as you possibly can
to increase the energy factor of it.
The technology is very new for producing biomass, and as
the different plants are being built globally, each new plant is
cheaper than the one before. So we are coming down a technology curve on
biomass. We've also confirmed that we can use
biomass to run the Rankine units at Huntly Power Station.
Our challenge at the moment is the economics of biomass
production.
It is currently in the order of $500 to $600 a
ton,
which translates into something in the 300s in
terms of a megawatt hour. And to compare that to coal, for example,
coal's about $180 a megawatt hour,
and gas is somewhere between $100 and $140 a
megawatt hour. So the challenge with biomass at the moment is the
economics,
and obviously, with a focus on the lowest cost generation
in New Zealand that we can offer.
Having that technology curve play out for some
time into the future is going to help lower that cost
of acquiring the fuel.
So part of your trials, you've established that you can blend
biomass with coal.
Yes.
What do the economics of it start to look like there per
megawatt hour?
Still above the other fuel options.
So you're still in the
200s.
Yep. And your assessment of what
LNG would be per megawatt hour?
We published in our annual results-
Which one was that?
FY24,
a stack of what the different generation types would be,
different fuels through different assets.
So, our best estimate at the moment for
LNG through unit five would be somewhere between $3 and $350
a megawatt hour.
So pretty much the same as biomass.
Pretty much the same as biomass.
Thank you.
Okay. I'm going to go to Dan next, and then I'm going to go to
Scott, and then I'm going to go to Carlos, then I'm going to go to Laura, then I'll
come back. I'll go to me, and then I'll go back to you if you want, Megan. Okay.
Away we go.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks to you and your team for what you do for New Zealand.
Just want to chat to you about coal.
How are our coal
usage looking for Huntly?
How does that differ for a dry year?
Which this isn't a dry year, but how has it been looking the last few years?
So, the coal stockpile at Huntly is around 1.1 million
tons, which is the highest level it's been at for some
years. Huntly Power Station running at full capacity burns
about 9,000 tons of coal a day. That's all three Rankine
units running at the same time. In the last
nine months, which is the three-quarters of this financial
year-We have burnt much lower
coal than normal, and that is because the rain
events in New Zealand have been regular, and they've fallen in the right
catchments to top the lakes up. So hydro is a much bigger
portion of generation this year than is normal.
And as a result of that, we've burnt less coal.
Great. And
that coal's still coming from Indonesia, is that right?
All of our coal at the moment is coming from New Zealand.
From New Zealand.
We have an agreement with BT Mining to
supply
10,000 tonnes of coal a month-
Right
... at the moment. And so when we go into a dry year,
we draw on that stock. There's not enough coal supply in New Zealand to
replenish that, so we go offshore for that.
We are this winter going to trial some coal from Australia.
We've found a mine in Australia that has a potential to supply New Zealand as
well. And we believe that there are two other international mines outside
of Indonesia that could potentially supply New Zealand as well.
So we're active in trying to diversify that coal
supply. But as is always the case, where we can source
appropriate and economic supply from New Zealand, we prioritise that.
And how is that impacting your emissions profile as a company?
Is it lower emissions or?
Yeah. So if we don't burn the coal, our emissions go down correspondingly.
I think it's better to look at trend over time, because when it's
a year like this year where hydro's high, you burn less coal.
The year before hydro was low, you burn more coal.
But the overall trend is trending down.
As we build more renewable generation, we will use less
thermal generation, and it will become more critical but
used less often.
And is there much emissions difference between New Zealand coal and South
Australia coal other than transportation costs?
No, that's it. Exactly.
Okay.
Yeah. The emissions profiles are very similar.
Okay, great. Thank you. Okay, I'll go Scott.
Thank you. So in your strategic objectives, you've
got a new purpose, powering sustainable and thriving Aotearoa, and
you've talked about the transition to energy independence.
I think that's a really big, big pull and
need at the moment, and it's a complex job.
So you've got a strategy.
We don't have a national energy strategy.
We've heard that it's not something important.
How do you
think
that will play out if
it's only happening bit by bit? What are your thoughts?
Do you think the sector is going to be able to deliver that energy
independence without a national energy
strategy, or are you
able to do it
on your own?
So there are three components to New Zealand's electricity
transition, and I'll use electricity rather than broader energy.
Mm-hmm.
The 60/95/100 formula that Barbara mentioned in her
opening remarks.
We're 30% electricity today. The Climate Change
Commission says that you need to get to 60% to meet net zero by
2050.
But if you were 60%, each household would be around
$2,000 a year better off because you'd spend less on molecules and more
on electrons, and electrons are cheaper than molecules.
So less petrol and diesel, more electricity, is where the
saving comes from.
Then you've got the 95%, which is the renewable generation of
electricity, and then you've got the 100% reliability of that supply.
So in order of priority of difficulty of challenge,
the 60% is the most difficult piece.
The 95% is the easiest piece. The 100%
is the mid challenge, which is you have to have electricity
available across minutes, hours, days, weeks, months, years,
for it to be a
useful part of the energy profile of New Zealand.
And so when we look at it as a business, ultimately it
is for the nation and policy makers to decide on the energy
direction of New Zealand. But when we look at it as a
business, the 60/95/100
objectives or formula deliver you lower total
cost of energy, net zero by 2050, energy security
and independence.
So in essence, anything you put together would have those
objectives in it as a deliverable.
So
we're focused on doing what we can towards the 60/95/100
objectives,
and on the basis that we believe any energy strategy that New Zealand
developed, that would be complementary to it.
So essentially you're saying you've got a strategy
regardless of the lack of national strategy,
and then
we could hope that others
have a similar approach,
but you're doing your bit. That's essentially your aim.
Yeah. The philosophy that we work by is that if everybody sweeps their own front
yard, the world's a tidy place. Now, we can't control
whether the world's tidy or not, we can only sweep our own front yard, and
that's where our focus on the 60/95/100 is about
sweeping our own front yard.
Okay. Cool.
Thank you. I asked the same question to every single company, so I
may as well just ask you guys as well.
How do you define affordable electricity for ordinary household
today, and do you believe that your current price meet the standard?
So electricity bills are made up of several different components.
Electricity itself, the electrons, are about 30 to
32% of your standard bill.
The infrastructure to get the electrons to around the country
is about 38% of the bill. And the rest is
made up of GST and other related retail
chargesSo we can only speak to the
32% part of the bill.
And we have a $3 billion investment
program over the next five years. Around 800 million being
spent on upgrading our existing generation assets,
and 2.2 billion on new renewable generation assets
that will
increase supply ahead of the demand of our customers.
And so we would expect the electron part of the bill to
begin to trend
down at a wholesale level over the coming years.
And when you stack up electricity against petrol and diesel,
for example, using more electrons and less molecules
is your pathway to lower total energy bills in New Zealand.
So do you think it's affordable? These are my questions.
So can I jump in there? Look, I think there's a lot to
affordability, and what's affordable for one
household is different to what's affordable for another household.
But we do have a team who
looks out for lead indicators of where a household might be
suffering some stress around their bill, and reaches out
to those households and
has a good conversation with them to see where they're struggling.
We open up channels for them into government
agencies who can help them. And so
we take a very proactive approach to this.
On the other side, a metric that we look at is around what's
going on with our bad debt profile in the company.
What's going on with defaults. And actually, it's a pretty
stable position at the moment. So I'm not advocating
that we define affordability, but what we look at is how
to help our customers with their electricity bill.
But in your pre-hearing question, your statement in a pre-hearing
statement, you actually mentioned that one of the advantage
being a generator is to lower the cost.
How would that actually reflect your current market pricing for customer?
Because I don't see much difference between your pricing
to just the retailer alone. So how can you
try to tell me that being a generator
have the ability to lower the cost then?
Well, electricity is a supply and demand equation.
It's a commodity like every other commodity in the world.
There's a shortage of supply of petrol and diesel at the moment.
The price is very high. Where we can influence it is
increasing the supply of electrons.
Equally, we can influence it in terms of how
households consume electricity.
So last year, we gave away 400,000 free LED light bulbs.
This year, we're doing the same again with EcoBulb, in partnership with
EcoBulb.
We're measuring the impact of changing those light bulbs at a
household or a customer level, and we can communicate with the
customer how much that behavior has decreased their
electricity bill, which we think will be around 4 to 6%.
Okay, Laura.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had another question, but I'll follow on
actually from Carlos a bit about energy abundance and what that
would actually mean to New Zealand.
And are you currently planning
for enough supply to reach demand, or are you actually planning for
abundance?
So there's two parts to that question. Electricity is a commodity.
It's about balancing supply and demand.
Investing in electricity generation assets are 20 to 50 year
decisions in the hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars.
And so, the most important thing is to make sure that you have
enough options to build for the future, and to build
what you need to build right now. Now, at $2.2
billion worth of new generation investment,
that is in the order of four to six times our normal
investment rate on that type of activity.
The other side of it is the 60 that I mentioned before.
If demand doesn't show up, then you've overinvested, and
if it does show up more than you expected, you've underinvested.
So the importance of having that pipeline of optionality and
maintaining flexibility in the system, and this is where Huntly Power Station is
very important, is Huntly Power Station offers a natural
shock absorber between the over and unders that you
get in the supply and demand equation.
And so, to answer your question, we're
investing more right now as a country than we did during the Think
Big era in terms of building new generation.
We very much intend for demand to show up for it.
I'll take a first crack.
Just in respect, you're also energy, you're also a gas provider.
Just in terms of thinking about if we're having an energy strategy, which I agree
with Scott, completely agree with
having a strategic approach to energy.
Gas and where we use the gas, because the amount of gas we've got available is
obviously falling, and how we use that best in our
system and think about the
conversion costs, which are not inconsiderable.
I think for households, million odd households, 10 to
13,000 a piece is the number EK has used.
That's $10 to $13 billion. That's quite a bit.
And then, of course, you've got industry, some of which absolutely needs gas.
Got any comments on how we make sure we use gas as best we possibly
can to keep
industry and reduce some of that conversion cost?
Yep. So winter '24, the gas shock of winter '24 was
significant. The
electricity market adjusted very quickly to
that.The way that we, as Genesis,
prioritise the gas that we have is the first priority
is to our household customers, the second priority is to our industrial
customers, and the third priority is to generate electricity.
And so what you've seen from us over the last two financial
years in particular is proactive
activity with industrials to get gas out of electricity
generation when we don't need it in electricity generation.
So last year, for example, we turned our gas turbines off in
October, November, and December, and
that carried on into January, and that gas went to support our
industrial clients rather than generating electricity.
As we build more renewable generation, the need for
baseload gas generation diminishes.
In fact, by the time you get to 2028/29,
baseload gas generation is actually not needed in the system.
That's for energy, right?
That's
for everyday generation of electricity, but you still need
it in the wintertime, you still need it when it's not blowing, and you still need
it when it's not raining.
And so we're using our fuel flexibility across coal and gas,
and our customer books to prioritise gas to homes,
to our industrial clients, and to flex our electricity
generation as much as we can to free up gas to do that.
Okay. So just to go to that,
what we got in winter 2024 is that situation basically
when
hydro, solar wasn't working enough, we need a backup, prices
went through the roof.
How do we make sure that we've got enough?
How does it work for you commercially, and how do we make sure that we've actually
got that reliability of supply, so that if we have situations like that,
a dry winter situation, all the renewables are not working to the
extent that we need, we need something.
How does that work in commercial terms, and how can we make sure we've got enough
of it, which is basically, let's simplify it, is not
being used the rest of the time at all.
Unless you have your Huntly deal, and we need some shock absorbers.
How big a shock absorbers, collection of shock absorbers do we need, and how does
the market make sure it provides for those,
especially if we diversify the number of
generators as well-
Yep
... because we've got more
not being generated by the four big
generators.
Yep. So as you build more solar and wind, electricity
supply is going to become more volatile.
Mm-hmm.
And so wind and rain in particular are relevant.
New Zealand's a small country. There's a high correlation between low wind and low
rain events.
And
so you do need flexible backup generation.
In terms of Genesis as a company,
we have no scenarios for low wind or low
rain events that we can't cover ourselves because of Huntly Power Station.
I'm interested in the system as a whole.
I know you're talking about the system.
I just want to make clear that as Genesis, on a standalone basis,
we don't share that problem widely.
We have enough reserve generation and fuel to cover our customer positions.
In the system more broadly, we've advanced
the Huntly firming options, which is the opportunity for people to
take up virtual rights on the generation at Huntly Power Station,
so the third ranking unit, which is the big coal-fired or
gas-fired generator that we have at Huntly was due to
go into retirement in January this year because it was no longer economic to
maintain on a pure generation basis.
So we offered that to the wider market, and we currently have six
other companies, not just the other gen tailers, but there are other
companies in the market that have bought those Huntly firming
options. Now, that gives them the right to
24/7, 365-day-a-year generation
at Huntly Power Station. So that is their firming option and their
opportunity to leverage Huntly Power Station.
It is their responsibility to decide how much fuel they hold in
reserve. We will procure it and transport it for them
and store it for them, but it's for them to decide how much they want to
use that
generation. So in the 1.1 million tons of coal that's
at Huntly at the moment, roughly 600,000 tons
sits on the long-term HFOs with the four gen
tailers. About 50,000 tons sits with the other
HFO holders. And the balance is Genesis'
own fuel reserve.
That's about 350.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, okay.
And so do you see in the systemic-- This is my last power question,
then I'll go to Megan. Do you see in the system as a whole that that
is sufficient shock absorber as a system as a whole, or do we need
more shock absorbers? Because I know there are some others being thought about,
like Marsden Point, for example.
Yep.
You're looking at that. So.
Look, I don't have visibility of the way that all
other operators in the market are running their supply and demand
positions.
I can only talk to Genesis' supply and demand positions and what
we're making available to the market.
We've been quite clear that if we can't get a commercial return on those
reserve assets, we can't maintain them ourselves.
That's why the Huntly firming options have been incredibly important.
But you'd really have to ask the individual players or the
system operator in terms of what the overall picture is and how much they
think is needed.
Okay. Thank you. Megan.
Thank you.
And Scott, I think you're next as well. Then we can go back here.
It's good that it's me because I'm actually kind of-So it comes through to me.
Tanguy's got to work out some questions himself.
Yeah.
No, no. I'm good. I'm not that generous.
I was going to ask through that. So
I'm not that generous. This is sounding like COVID then, Jessica.
Yeah.
No, go. Go, go.
No, but seriously, it is me. And this is two lots.
Go.
Looking at the cabinet paper that was produced around
LNG that went through at a very high level what
some other alternatives were that, um, the Rankine
option was one of the things there.
What would the capital cost be of putting in a third Rankine at
Huntly to provide more of a buffer in the system?
At a desktop level, somewhere between three and three point five
million a megawatt.
So it depends what size Rankine you want.
But if you
choose your megawatt capacity and multiply it by somewhere
between three and three point five million dollars a megawatt, that'll give you the
capital cost.
That's not a detailed position. We'd have to do a lot
more detailed work to firm that up.
But based on the work that we did a couple of years ago after winter
'24, that's about the price range.
So a billion dollars compared to an LNG facility
could give us a lot of Rankine.
Three to three and a half million dollars a megawatt.
Yeah.
If you buy a 50 megawatt one, it's a lot cheaper.
If you buy a 500 megawatt option, it's going to be a lot more, so.
Thank you. On the
desktop
cursory look at options that Edna had before it,
that the cost of generation, the Rankine was the lowest scored best
for the cost of generation on there.
One of the
risks that
Cabinet based its decision on was that having the
Rankines would lock in significant new generation
capacity. Have you had any discussions with government about why this
would be seen as a negative in our energy system?
No, I don't know the context of the comment in the Cabinet paper,
so.
It's in the flexibility section.
Okay.
It's listed as a negative that using the
Rankines would lock in significant new generation
capacity. Happy to share that with you later.
Yeah. I'd need to understand the context of that.
I don't know there's many other people in the country that think new generation is
a negative.
Right.
So I just wondered if you had any insight into that.
One of the other risks that is highlighted from
Cabinet is that having a new Rankine was the slowest
option,
with significant delivery risk. And of course, this was compared to
an LNG facility that had been earmarked that
there would be bespoke fast-tracking legislation.
If you had similar fast-tracking
prioritization within the system, how quickly could you put a Rankine in
place?
I can't answer that because I haven't spoken to Rankine suppliers.
Mm-hmm.
And
so we haven't done that detailed work, so I can't give you a detailed
figure. But it would be probably somewhere up to
the five-year mark.
But I couldn't give you an accurate figure because we haven't done that level of
detailed work.
But we could continue to use the three other Rankines that are
there while we waited for a fourth Rankine to come on stream. Yeah.
We're currently investing-
Exactly
... $100 million extending the life of the three Rankines.
And of course, the third Rankine was due to go out of service in January, and we're
now extending it to 2035. So those three
Rankines, subject to commercial arrangements being in place as they are
now, those three Rankines should be there till 2035.
Okay. So it could be cheaper, it could lock in
significant new generation capacity, it would have lower emissions,
and we could have it up and running. It seems like it could be a good deal.
One of the questions I have-
In five years
... is whether Genesis has signed or government
has discussed Genesis signing any binding
commitments or memorandas understandings around minimum
offtake agreements of LNG. If it goes ahead, one of the things
that we know to compete globally in the LNG
market, that we can't have variable supply contracts,
we'll need to be locked into a minimum supply contract.
So have there been any discussions with you around
locking you in to that? And if so, who will
use the LNG that we don't use in a
wet year?
As we said in our equity raise earlier this year to investors,
Genesis has its dry year and low
wind period obligations covered under our existing
fuel storage and generation assets.
That in the event the government procurement process
proceeded, that we would look to bring new HFO
products on unit five, our large gas turbine, into the market.
As to the demand for those, I don't know the answer to that.
In terms of has Genesis contracted any
LNG? No. The answer's no. We're waiting for the procurement process to play
out as everybody else is.
But there hasn't been any discussion about minimum offtake?
Not to my knowledge, no.
Okay. One of the questions I think so that-
We can take one more question, yeah.
One of the questions that everybody has is, and I
don't know if you can answer it, so it's really whether there's been any
discussions with you around it, is whether or not this will be,
whether you have a stake in the investment, who will decide when to
use it, how that's going to play out.
Have there been any discussions with government in how this is going to
factor into the market from you as the
owner of the asset that would be running it? Has that been discussed?
So again, if I go back to our equity raise in March this year,
we were clear with the market that we wouldn't be an investor in an LNG
terminalSo our capital wouldn't be going into an LNG
terminal,
that we would bring Huntly firming options to market if
LNG became available in the market.
But we have no confirmation to that-
Yeah
... so we haven't brought any HFOs forward at this point.
Yeah.
Why aren't you an investor in LNG?
We are ultimately focused on our
portfolio, which is investing in building our renewable
generation, and leveraging our existing assets at
Huntly.
Thank you.
Okay, cool. Scott,
I just want to return to Carlos's question about hardship that
we're seeing with high electricity prices and
high fuel prices,
and your concern about people decarbonizing.
Really good to hear that you're working with Chris with Ecovolt, but we've
heard from Meridian, for example.
Meridian are putting in $5 million into energy hardship programs, $1
million a year distributed through community energy network members.
He's shown an openness to discussing this with other
gentailers to bulk funding that.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm wondering what your openness is to helping
those out of quite a healthy dividend that you're able to
provide,
providing a slice of that, say $5 million,
to match the Meridian contribution to the community energy
network members who are working in our communities.
They help insulate homes, help people in extreme hardship, put
in ventilation
with black mold-
Mm-hmm
... curtains.
Let's keep the question tight, Scott.
Is there an appetite there? I know you've done some work in energy hardship, but
rather than these bespoke things, wouldn't it be nice
if there was a combined approach?
So Genesis has a coordinated program around that.
We invest between $5 and $8 million a year
into those programs. We prioritize the communities
that we have generation sites in. There's a wide range
of that intervention.
That includes curtain banks, energy
support, et cetera,
direct investment into
solar projects at a community level.
We also have our Power Shout program, which is several
hundred thousand hours a year of free power, and our customers
can donate those to households in hardship.
I don't have the figure here with me right now in terms of what last year's
donations were, but we make a significant donation into that
ourselves.
So just as a follow-up. The question really is about, and
I realize that different gentailers have their own programs.
It's not around their own programs because part of the problem
that we hear from the community sector is that there's a heavy
admin cost of using programs
from the different gentailers
that could go to just delivering at the frontline.
And if those
resources were put into a bulk
energy wellbeing fund
working through community energy network members,
it wouldn't necessarily go to Genesis customers, wouldn't necessarily go to
Meridian customers. It would go to people in hardship,
but it would help us reduce
the energy poverty, the extreme distress we see people in-
Mm-hmm
... if there was that willingness to work more as
a gentailer collective. Is that something that you would consider
Look, I think we're open-minded to all options.
We are committed to our existing programs at the moment, like we have
multi-year commitments to not-for-profit electricity
retailers, our own communities, our own community programs, et
cetera. But we're always open-minded in terms of how we do
our bit, whether that is collectively or individually.
We're not sitting here going, "We won't work with the others."
We're just simply saying that at the moment,
that is not a pathway that is under active discussion.
We are focused on the commitments that we have at the moment to
supporting our communities where we operate.
Thanks, Scott.
Can I just very quickly very quickly-
Scott, the problem is you're taking a blooming long time to answer the question.
This is my question.
Okay. Two seconds.
Just to say, look, if you're open to it, can we meet and talk?
Sure.
Thank you. Okay, good. That was quick.
Keep them that way. Okay, Carlos.
Thank you. My question is,
there's quite a lot of
business actually invest in solar farm these days.
But I actually heard from multiple dependent energy generator that
the current market structure and the PPA are favor the
big gentailers, and you guys dominant the market and
also only relied on the power as
only a backup suppliers. What is your respond to this concern?
Can I just ask how
are PPAs favoring the gentailers?
May I say, a lot of feedback coming up is you guys
only buy energy from them when you need them, so you're not
going to provide them a sustainable or long-term contract.
So that create very unfavorable
business environment for those small solar farms because you
always choose when to buy it or when not to buy the energy.
So just so I understand the question, your question is that we only buy the
energy when we need it.
This is what I hear from a lot of small solar farm.
So why would we buy energy when we don't need it?
Well, that's the thing, right? When you sign the contract with them, so
this is why I said it's not favorable to them
because you guys dominant the market.
You guys have all the structure.And you only use
them because on the government point of view, we want more competition.
We want more energies being produced to fit
the market. But the way you guys
sign the agreement with them or the way you
dominate the market, actually, you basically kill off all these
businesses
and make them unavailable.
That's quite a significant allegation.
Every generator in New Zealand is required to sell all of their
electricity to the wholesale electricity market-
Mm
... and to buy back what they need.
Yeah.
So I'm not understanding if an independent generator-
Mm
... wants us to buy energy we won't need so their business works,
how does that work?
So you guys-
I'm not understanding what you're saying.
Yes, but a lot of them, they actually sign an agreement that
you
help you to take on the energies they generate,
but only do it when you really
need it. And-
So are you saying that our shareholders should underwrite their financial
returns, and we should take risk on energy we don't need?
Well, I understand on that aspect, but I'm just saying that is it because of that
you guys already dominant the market, so that create
unfair competition ground for all the
new entrants or all the new businesses set up in this sector.
So Genesis is 15% of the electricity market in New Zealand, so we
don't dominate anything.
But I'm not-
Well, the big four company actually dominate the market
... I'm still not understanding why it would be in our shareholders' interest
to buy energy we don't need.
Can I
put it this way and ask you a question, which I think will
hopefully help with that?
Okay.
So if we have a, an... Because there's one of the questions in there about
intermittent generation.
Mm-hmm.
If we have a vast proliferation of
solar generation-
Mm-hmm
... no batteries, let's say,
and they want to sell to the market.
There is a certain point in time, presumably, which people say, "Well, look, that's
very nice. You've got it operating during the day in the fine weather,
but we don't actually want all of that power then because we've got other things
which are generating then, which also generate at other times as well."
Yep.
That'd be fair.
Yeah, so ultimately, New Zealanders want to buy energy for
breakfast and dinner, and solar generates energy for lunch.
Yeah.
Okay? So there's a value mismatch that's there.
Electricity is a system that's either 100% on or it's
not on at all.
And so when you generate electricity from solar, it has to
go to market or you have to be able to store it somewhere.
That's what batteries are for. But I would just
say that anyone can come to market and offer
anything to anyone. It's a free and open and very transparent
market. And to be honest, it's a very difficult
market to make a return on at a generation asset level.
The returns are 8 to 9%.
Okay, can I ask a couple questions and then I'll go to Laura, and then I'll come to
you, Megan. So just in the written answers
to questions, you've got there the generation stack report, this is
the Transpower one, and the cost per megawatt
of installed capacity.
But then there's also factor you've got to take into account there, well,
solar's the cheapest. I'm not picking on solar, I have a little bit, I suppose.
Solar at 1.9, but it's the generate, the actual what you actually get
out of them,
its ability to generate that. What sort of numbers do you usually
apply to the, for your solar, wind, hydro, geothermal,
because-
In terms of the cost to-
No. Well, let's say solar says, 1.9 million per
megawatt-
Yep
... capacity.
Mm-hmm.
But we know that it doesn't generate most of the time.
That's right.
It generates at about-
20% of the year.
20%.
It generates, yeah.
Wind generates at about 40 something.
40%, yeah. 40%.
And hydro and geothermal, if they need to, are up to about 100.
Depending on rain.
Close to, yeah.
It won't be 100, it'll be a bit-
Yeah, that's in the 90 to 100.
But it'll be-
So when you're looking at the cost per megawatt hour generated, it's a very
different number than the
boilerplate number-
Yep
... of theoretical capacity.
Yep. The capital cost is quite different as well.
Oh, yes. No, I see that. But those are the capital cost development per, you've
given us per megawatt capacity as
opposed to actual megawatt hour generated.
Okay, look, two questions if I can at this stage.
One of them is pricing trajectory, because you've talked about, there's a question
there that talks about the,
how do we best reduce... The question was how do we best reduce electricity prices?
And then the answer was, how do we reduce the fastest way to lower
total energy costs? Those are two different things, as you've obviously described
at the beginning.
Yes.
What's the trajectory looking like for electricity costs?
Because I understand it's downwards.
Mm-hmm.
Downwards, and you're nodding. And when do we start to see
electricity companies sending out, or would it be the retail side, obviously,
sending out
notices. Normally, we're used to them saying a notice to say your power price
is going to go up. When do we start seeing some saying, "Well, look, the wholesale
price is starting to trend down. We are going to reduce your
electricity bill
beginning of next month or beginning of the following month." Because I think that
would be a very welcome thing.
Yeah. So-
So when do we start seeing that?
Yeah. So if you look at the components of an electricity bill, the
32% that represents electrons-
Yep
... is certainly stable now and likely to
not have upward cost pressure in it for the foreseeable
future, and that is because of the billions and billions of dollars
that is being invested in new electricity generation.
And if you read the capital market reports, you'll see that the risk
they're alive to at the moment is
overbuild.
Their concern is we're building too much generation at the
moment.The other part of the bill, the
38% that relates to lines charges-
Mm-hmm
... that will continue to go up for this pricing period.
So lines charges are priced and approved by the Commerce Commission every five
years.
Yes, understand that.
Those parts of your bill will continue to go up.
We have no reason to believe GST is going to change.
All right.
And most retailers are driving their operating costs down.
So as we start seeing, because it's usually you guys
are picked on as being the problem in terms of pricing.
As we see further notices go to customers, whether it's
business or retail, presumably there was something saying actually the price of
the electricity component is coming down.
Look, I can't predict what the future is.
Well, but-
On that basis, because we price about six months in advance.
Yeah, well-
But the fundamentals of the wholesale electricity market have
downward pressure in them.
That's exactly what I'm saying, that if you can't predict the future, the wholesale
market is, and you're part of the wholesale market.
That's right.
So you're predicting the future is lower electricity price, the electron bit.
So you can say to the notice, it's coming down, it's the
lines part which is going up, and then people can actually pay attention.
If something fundamentally disrupts the build program that's in play at the
moment, that'll change that dynamic.
Yeah.
If something disrupts the demand side, it will
change that dynamic. It is a very simple commodity of supply
and demand.
Yeah. And look, you also touched my last question here at this stage.
Oh, actually, no, well, I'll ask a different one.
Regional cost variation.
Yep.
To what degree do we see regional cost variation, and what's the cause of
that? Because my understanding is it's because there is a lack of generation
in that particular region.
We've got, like, 10 minutes left.
Okay.
I'm three years into this sector and still don't understand the answer to that
question.
Oh, good. Okay. We'll have to have a further conversation outside.
I'll arrange to come and see you.
Yeah. Had a good conversation with Transpower on that.
Yeah.
So yeah, okay. I think, Laura, did you have a question?
Just really quickly.
And then I'll go back to you, Ben.
My question is, what consenting changes would
allow
new projects and new generation?
It's got the RMA changes going through.
Mm-hmm.
Is there anything that you foresee would be a
decent change that could actually unlock a lot of that potential
opportunity?
I think the Transpower queue is the,
the grids, the transmission queue is the next
big thing to unlock.
Consenting regimes are speeding up, which is
helpful.
But connecting, it's a bit like building a shopping center
and not being able to connect to the main road.
Yep.
And so connecting to the main road is the next big area that would assist.
Would you say, particularly in our lines and that transmission part, that we've
got quite a deficit as a country?
I wouldn't say deficit,
other than you've got a massive step
change in the building program in New Zealand.
And that's put a lot of pressure right through the system.
And so you're in the messy middle of the energy transition in New
Zealand at the moment. And we're going to have bumps
in that messy middle, and not everything moves
in a linear way.
Mm-hmm.
And so as we've all decided to invest billions of
dollars quickly,
that flows on to the need to get electrons onto the superhighway
and then distribute it out to homes and businesses across New Zealand.
Okay. Rika.
Thank you.
Just
kind of round the houses, four
things. One is the Bioenergy Taskforce, that
Genesis was part of, that was set up to
ensure no unnecessary barriers to getting the
supply chain really in place at pace.
What specific policy or regulatory barriers
have been identified through that work, and what responses
as a member of the task force have you received on that?
Sitting here, I don't have detailed knowledge on those outputs.
Be good to have that back.
Happy to follow back with you afterwards.
Come back.
What I would say is economics is the biggest challenge in that at the moment.
Great.
We had some talk earlier in this hearing about
the need
to ship people off gas,
and to get the best value for New Zealand off gas.
Of course, we did have a scheme in place under the previous government.
The government investment in decarbonizing industry, 119
businesses were transitioned away from
gas and coal. Is it your opinion that
having some form of partnership between government and
industry would accelerate the move of
many of our businesses off gas and onto more secure
and more affordable fuels?
Whether we like it or not, as a country, we're getting off gas because we're
running out of it. That's
just a fact at the moment.
The
area that we're seeing in our customer base at the moment,
is the decision between moving to
LPG or moving to electricity.
So if you are a business
or a household that uses low to medium heat
ranges,
LPG is a realistic alternative,
and the conversion is often cheaper to LPG than it is to
electricity. And so that would be the area that we're seeing at the
moment where the tension on moving off gas for a lot of homes and
businesses is sittingSo if you want to move to LPG, you
disconnect your gas and you put in a regulator and some bottles,
and you can run your hot water heating and your heating and
your cooking and all that as normal pretty much.
So that's capital constraints stopping that then?
Yeah, it's the capital constraint.
Whereas if you want to electrify everything, you've got to change your heater,
change your hot water, change your cooking, et cetera.
That is more expensive at the moment than changing your gas
supply.
Thank you. The next thing is, I did say it was around the houses.
So Genesis does have quite a program around battery
electric storage systems, BESS. You've got the 100
megawatt and 200 megawatt at Huntly.
Mm-hmm.
Coming online 2027, and then a stage two.
Two, yeah.
Can you give us a bit of an update on that?
And one of the very detailed questions, which I'm not sure that you can answer,
is whether or not these BESS
systems are going to be set up to do frequency moderation
in the way that we've relied on our hydro system to do it.
But as we expand, whether those systems will be kind of doing
both that storage and frequency moderation.
Yep. So let me start with the back end of that question.
Yeah.
Huntly Power Station is regularly used as a frequency moderator-
Yeah
... because of its location in the upper North Island next to those big population
centers.
Yeah.
So that is an important job-
Yeah
... that Huntly does. In terms of whether we can use our BESS to do
that, I don't have the answer for you-
Okay
... right here.
In terms of our strategy towards batteries, we are
looking at the ability to store energy across minutes, hours, days, weeks, and
months across our portfolio.
Batteries are minutes and hours. And we are
approaching it in three different levels.
So first of all, the big grid scale batteries that are going
into Huntly, which is 400 megawatt hours of battery
storage. Huntly has a 1400 megawatt grid connection, so
it has an enormous off-ramp and an enormous on-ramp into the
electron superhighway in New Zealand.
The second thing is all of our wind and solar farms are being
consented and designed to have smaller scale batteries
installed down the track. And all of the balance, all of
the transformers that we put in, are built for future battery
installation.
And then at a third level, we are the largest distributed energy retailer in
New Zealand, over 34,000 rooftop solar battery
customers.
5% of our generation was purchased off our customers in January, for
example. And as
that distributed storage starts to become more proximate,
that is going to be a critical part of our short-term energy storage
strategy as well.
So just on that, perfect segue because my next thing was
demand response and DER.
Yep.
So in terms of
what are you doing in terms of
smoothing that peak, what are some of the initiatives?
Gridsmart obviously is something-
Yep
... that you've got underway, but in terms of what we can be doing
more in terms of solar batteries,
and to what extent when your households are going
solar, are they matching batteries with that, and
are those batteries contributing to our demand
response?
Mm-hmm.
Are you kind of marshaling them as a national reserve of
batteries?
And also connected to that is smart charging for
EVs-
Yep
... and what we're seeing there.
Yeah. So,
as I said in my opening remarks, electrifying
transport is the
win here. Rooftop solar with batteries is relevant, but
it's not the big win.
From this year, you will have credible EV to grid options starting to come
into New Zealand, and so an electric vehicle gives you
a double hit. You get fossil fuels out of your
energy bill, but you also potentially get an energy storage
system that can be used to ride
through the low pricing in the middle of the day and the middle of the night, et
cetera.
So I just really want to reemphasize that because EVs are
sort of like becoming the Swiss Army knife of distributed
energy.
In terms of batteries, it's not easy at the moment
in many parts of New Zealand to be able to coordinate
distributed battery systems.
That is because of the separation between the battery
owner and the technology owner.
We're actually finding more success in hot water cylinders at the moment.
Sorry, can you just clarify the battery owner and the technology owner?
If you go to the Solar Zero
structure, which is-
Oh, okay
... the majority of distributed batteries at the moment.
Panasonic are the software operator, and the battery is owned by a
different company. So if you want to coordinate it, you have to do a deal with
Panasonic, for example. That's just one example.
There are many other examples.
But one of the peakiest uses in the household of electricity is
light bulbs,
and so when we did the trial in Christchurch two winters ago, we actually
measured the impact on peak load, and it's materially
measurable. And so for us, it was cheaper
to buy almost
800,000 light bulbs than it was to keep starting and stopping
Rankines at Huntly Power Station.
So we're looking to smooth out the peaks as a result of that.
Batteries into the system will continue to smooth that peak out
. And so there's no one silver bullet in this.
Yeah.
There's a lot of levers that are being pulled at the moment around
managing the volatility that is in the system, both on a
demand and supply side.
Ingrid's mark, can you give us an update on that?
I can't.
Okay.
Because I don't have one. I'm happy to give you one outside of this, but I'd need
to go and ask some people.
Okay.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
Okay, thanks. I'll go to Carlos.
Thank you. On the pure question-
You might get what you ask
... you keep mentioning that you're-
I'll come to you
... putting shareholders on your
priorities.
So what profit margin are you targeting for, for your shareholders?
So in our equity round that we raised money in
March this year, we said that new investment would
generate between 8 and 10% return on investment.
And that's fairly standard for new generation.
So that is at the low end of infrastructure investment returns
in the world.
But that is the range that we target, 8 to 10%.
So since government are the bigger shareholders, 51% of the
shares.
Mm-hmm.
How can you balance out your shareholders' benefit and social
responsibility?
Do you want to answer the shareholder piece or...?
Well, I think what we do is consider the range
of expectations from all our stakeholders,
and generating a profit in a business like
Genesis is all about returning dividends to
shareholders, but also providing enough retained earnings for us
to have the CapEx to be able to continue with our build
program. So we have to continually balance these
expectations from our shareholders to get that mix right, so that we
can continue to grow the company, but also provide the
returns that they expect.
So outside of the government, 49% of Genesis is held by
private shareholders. A good portion of them, about
30% of our total shareholding, are mum and dad investors,
KiwiSaver investors. I don't know anyone that
wants a zero return on their KiwiSaver account.
But if they do, send them our way, because we'd love to have them as an
investor.
And so return on capital is important.
It's not just important for the government, it's important for the 49% of
Genesis that's not owned by the government as well.
Our social responsibility is taken really seriously.
We invest in the communities we operate in.
Many of our staff are intergenerational staff members.
And we are the largest employer in those communities.
We reinvest into those communities.
We also run very substantial programs to look after our customers.
Customers is where your demand comes from.
Falling demand in the business is a terrible thing to have to deal with, so we want
our customers to grow and be prosperous as well.
So we take both of those things incredibly seriously.
Do you think there's a room to further lower the power cost?
I've already asked that question.
Oh, you asked it?
Yeah.
Yeah. I think the trajectory is downwards, but downwards.
I'm still looking for that. I'll ask one quick one because it is exactly on that,
and then I'll go to Scott. And that is just, if you'd done what Carlos is kind of
implying, which is a much lower rate of return, which was
implicit in the capital raise, so let's say it'd been 4%, for example.
How do you think the capital raise would've gone, and what implication would that
have had for future investment in generation?
I think it would've been a struggle to get the capital raise out the door-
Mm
... at that kind of metric.
Mm.
Because investors have lots of options, and they're looking for a return.
They're also looking for faith in the company to deliver what we said we were
going to deliver with that capital raise.
So-
And what implications would that have had for future investment and generation?
Well, we wouldn't have been able to invest-
We wouldn't have had the CapEx.
Sorry.
We wouldn't have had the capital to be able to do the investment to get to our
Gen35 strategy outcomes that we're looking for.
That's your answer. Scott.
Yeah. You've talked about what happens if demand doesn't turn up, but
also in that clearly you've also set out that demand is going to turn
up because we're electrifying. So, and plenty
of build, but
not quite enough to lower the prices of
electricity generation,
and we know that renewables are the lowest cost.
So
again, you've talked about transparency in the market.
Are you really supportive of the level playing field measures, the
mandatory non-discrimination obligations?
Is this something that you really get behind?
Well, Jen, it-
For making sure that that transparency is there, so we
see what prices are available in the market and that the
independent retailers, for example, can bid into that,
can
know what's there.
The market is very transparent.
Compare it to the gas market, which is not transparent.
Electricity in New Zealand is very, very transparent.
Now, clearly the Electricity Authority is working to make it more
transparent. And we don't fear
transparency.
So you're in support.
We don't fear transparency.
You're in support.
As long as the level playing field is genuinely level
and not tilted.
So you're in support of the mandatory non-discrimination obligations.
We're in support of a transparent market
that is fair to everybody.
On that note, I think we'll say we're at time.
Thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Thank you.
We've hopefully all learnt a lot.
And there may be some follow-up questions to ask.
Sure.
But I'm still keen on this regional variation of prices, so might
have to come and arrange a-
Yeah
... further conversation.
Like I said, three years into it, and still getting to grips with that one.
Yeah. Okay. No, appreciate that. Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Thanks, Matt